    <h1>
      BOOK ONE&mdash;The Romantic Egotist
    </h1>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0001" id="link2HCH0001">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 1. Amory, Son of Beatrice
    </h2>
    <p>
      Amory Blaine inherited from his mother every trait, except the stray
      inexpressible few, that made him worth while. His father, an ineffectual,
      inarticulate man with a taste for Byron and a habit of drowsing over the
      Encyclopedia Britannica, grew wealthy at thirty through the death of two
      elder brothers, successful Chicago brokers, and in the first flush of
      feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice
      O&rsquo;Hara. In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height
      of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these
      two abstractions appearing in his son Amory. For many years he hovered in
      the background of his family&rsquo;s life, an unassertive figure with a face
      half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in &ldquo;taking
      care&rdquo; of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn&rsquo;t and
      couldn&rsquo;t understand her.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Beatrice Blaine! There was a woman! Early pictures taken on her
      father&rsquo;s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart
      Convent&mdash;an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for
      the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy&mdash;showed the exquisite
      delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her
      clothes. A brilliant education she had&mdash;her youth passed in
      renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman
      Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal
      Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have
      had some culture even to have heard of. She learned in England to prefer
      whiskey and soda to wine, and her small talk was broadened in two senses
      during a winter in Vienna. All in all Beatrice O&rsquo;Hara absorbed the sort of
      education that will be quite impossible ever again; a tutelage measured by
      the number of things and people one could be contemptuous of and charming
      about; a culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in
      the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses
      to produce one perfect bud.
    </p>
    <p>
      In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine
      and married him&mdash;this almost entirely because she was a little bit
      weary, a little bit sad. Her only child was carried through a tiresome
      season and brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six.
    </p>
    <p>
      When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her. He was
      an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to
      in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his
      fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her
      father&rsquo;s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that
      she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City,
      where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased
      her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere&mdash;especially
      after several astounding bracers.
    </p>
    <p>
      So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses
      on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from &ldquo;Do
      and Dare,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Frank on the Mississippi,&rdquo; Amory was biting acquiescent
      bell-boys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music
      and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his
      mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, Beatrice.&rdquo; (Such a quaint name for his mother; she encouraged it.)
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear, don&rsquo;t <i>think</i> of getting out of bed yet. I&rsquo;ve always suspected
      that early rising in early life makes one nervous. Clothilde is having
      your breakfast brought up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am feeling very old to-day, Amory,&rdquo; she would sigh, her face a rare
      cameo of pathos, her voice exquisitely modulated, her hands as facile as
      Bernhardt&rsquo;s. &ldquo;My nerves are on edge&mdash;on edge. We must leave this
      terrifying place to-morrow and go searching for sunshine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory&rsquo;s penetrating green eyes would look out through tangled hair at his
      mother. Even at this age he had no illusions about her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, <i>yes</i>.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want you to take a red-hot bath as hot as you can bear it, and just
      relax your nerves. You can read in the tub if you wish.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She fed him sections of the &ldquo;Fetes Galantes&rdquo; before he was ten; at eleven
      he could talk glibly, if rather reminiscently, of Brahms and Mozart and
      Beethoven. One afternoon, when left alone in the hotel at Hot Springs, he
      sampled his mother&rsquo;s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he
      became quite tipsy. This was fun for a while, but he essayed a cigarette
      in his exaltation, and succumbed to a vulgar, plebeian reaction. Though
      this incident horrified Beatrice, it also secretly amused her and became
      part of what in a later generation would have been termed her &ldquo;line.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This son of mine,&rdquo; he heard her tell a room full of awestruck, admiring
      women one day, &ldquo;is entirely sophisticated and quite charming&mdash;but
      delicate&mdash;we&rsquo;re all delicate; <i>here</i>, you know.&rdquo; Her hand was
      radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to
      a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial. They rejoiced, for she
      was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks
      that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara....
    </p>
    <p>
      These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the
      private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician.
      When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at
      each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number
      of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen.
      However, blood being thicker than broth, he was pulled through.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Blaines were attached to no city. They were the Blaines of Lake
      Geneva; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends, and
      an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod. But Beatrice grew more and
      more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories,
      such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories
      of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular
      intervals. Like Freudian dreams, they must be thrown off, else they would
      sweep in and lay siege to her nerves. But Beatrice was critical about
      American women, especially the floating population of ex-Westerners.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They have accents, my dear,&rdquo; she told Amory, &ldquo;not Southern accents or
      Boston accents, not an accent attached to any locality, just an accent&rdquo;&mdash;she
      became dreamy. &ldquo;They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down
      on their luck and have to be used by some one. They talk as an English
      butler might after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company.&rdquo; She
      became almost incoherent&mdash;&ldquo;Suppose&mdash;time in every Western
      woman&rsquo;s life&mdash;she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to
      have&mdash;accent&mdash;they try to impress <i>me</i>, my dear&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her
      soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life. She had once been
      a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive
      when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she
      maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude. Often she deplored the
      bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy, and was quite sure that
      had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul
      would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome. Still, next to
      doctors, priests were her favorite sport.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, Bishop Wiston,&rdquo; she would declare, &ldquo;I do not want to talk of myself.
      I can imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors,
      beseeching you to be simpatico&rdquo;&mdash;then after an interlude filled by
      the clergyman&mdash;&ldquo;but my mood&mdash;is&mdash;oddly dissimilar.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she
      had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian
      young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental
      conversations she had taken a decided penchant&mdash;they had discussed
      the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of
      sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the
      young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the
      Catholic Church, and was now&mdash;Monsignor Darcy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Indeed, Mrs. Blaine, he is still delightful company&mdash;quite the
      cardinal&rsquo;s right-hand man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory will go to him one day, I know,&rdquo; breathed the beautiful lady, &ldquo;and
      Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory became thirteen, rather tall and slender, and more than ever on to
      his Celtic mother. He had tutored occasionally&mdash;the idea being that
      he was to &ldquo;keep up,&rdquo; at each place &ldquo;taking up the work where he left off,&rdquo;
       yet as no tutor ever found the place he left off, his mind was still in
      very good shape. What a few more years of this life would have made of him
      is problematical. However, four hours out from land, Italy bound, with
      Beatrice, his appendix burst, probably from too many meals in bed, and
      after a series of frantic telegrams to Europe and America, to the
      amazement of the passengers the great ship slowly wheeled around and
      returned to New York to deposit Amory at the pier. You will admit that if
      it was not life it was magnificent.
    </p>
    <p>
      After the operation Beatrice had a nervous breakdown that bore a
      suspicious resemblance to delirium tremens, and Amory was left in
      Minneapolis, destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and
      uncle. There the crude, vulgar air of Western civilization first catches
      him&mdash;in his underwear, so to speak.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      A KISS FOR AMORY
    </p>
    <p>
      His lip curled when he read it.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;I am going to have a bobbing party,&rdquo; it said, &ldquo;on Thursday,
  December the seventeenth, at five o&rsquo;clock, and I would like it
  very much if you could come.

                        Yours truly,

  R.S.V.P.                                     Myra St. Claire.
</pre>
    <p>
      He had been two months in Minneapolis, and his chief struggle had been the
      concealing from &ldquo;the other guys at school&rdquo; how particularly superior he
      felt himself to be, yet this conviction was built upon shifting sands. He
      had shown off one day in French class (he was in senior French class) to
      the utter confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned
      contemptuously, and to the delight of the class. Mr. Reardon, who had
      spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the
      verbs, whenever he had his book open. But another time Amory showed off in
      history class, with quite disastrous results, for the boys there were his
      own age, and they shrilled innuendoes at each other all the following
      week:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aw&mdash;I b&rsquo;lieve, doncherknow, the Umuricun revolution was <i>lawgely</i>
      an affair of the middul <i>clawses</i>,&rdquo; or
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Washington came of very good blood&mdash;aw, quite good&mdash;I b&rsquo;lieve.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory ingeniously tried to retrieve himself by blundering on purpose. Two
      years before he had commenced a history of the United States which, though
      it only got as far as the Colonial Wars, had been pronounced by his mother
      completely enchanting.
    </p>
    <p>
      His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that
      it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make
      furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his
      ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly
      around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be
      able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in
      his skates.
    </p>
    <p>
      The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire&rsquo;s bobbing party spent the morning
      in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty
      piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with
      a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back
      of Collar and Daniel&rsquo;s &ldquo;First-Year Latin,&rdquo; composed an answer:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  My dear Miss St. Claire:
  Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday
  evening was truly delightful to receive this morning.  I will be
  charm and inchanted indeed to present my compliments on next
  Thursday evening.
                          Faithfully,

                                          Amory Blaine.

</pre>
    <hr />
    <p>
      On Thursday, therefore, he walked pensively along the slippery,
      shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra&rsquo;s house, on the
      half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have
      favored. He waited on the door-step with his eyes nonchalantly
      half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision. He would cross the
      floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the
      correct modulation:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My <i>dear</i> Mrs. St. Claire, I&rsquo;m <i>frightfully</i> sorry to be late,
      but my maid&rdquo;&mdash;he paused there and realized he would be quoting&mdash;&ldquo;but
      my uncle and I had to see a fella&mdash;Yes, I&rsquo;ve met your enchanting
      daughter at dancing-school.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then he would shake hands, using that slight, half-foreign bow, with all
      the starchy little females, and nod to the fellas who would be standing
      &lsquo;round, paralyzed into rigid groups for mutual protection.
    </p>
    <p>
      A butler (one of the three in Minneapolis) swung open the door. Amory
      stepped inside and divested himself of cap and coat. He was mildly
      surprised not to hear the shrill squawk of conversation from the next
      room, and he decided it must be quite formal. He approved of that&mdash;as
      he approved of the butler.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Myra,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      To his surprise the butler grinned horribly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, yeah,&rdquo; he declared, &ldquo;she&rsquo;s here.&rdquo; He was unaware that his failure to
      be cockney was ruining his standing. Amory considered him coldly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But,&rdquo; continued the butler, his voice rising unnecessarily, &ldquo;she&rsquo;s the
      only one what <i>is</i> here. The party&rsquo;s gone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory gasped in sudden horror.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She&rsquo;s been waitin&rsquo; for Amory Blaine. That&rsquo;s you, ain&rsquo;t it? Her mother
      says that if you showed up by five-thirty you two was to go after &lsquo;em in
      the Packard.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory&rsquo;s despair was crystallized by the appearance of Myra herself,
      bundled to the ears in a polo coat, her face plainly sulky, her voice
      pleasant only with difficulty.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Lo, Amory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Lo, Myra.&rdquo; He had described the state of his vitality.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;you <i>got</i> here, <i>any</i>ways.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;I&rsquo;ll tell you. I guess you don&rsquo;t know about the auto
      accident,&rdquo; he romanced.
    </p>
    <p>
      Myra&rsquo;s eyes opened wide.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who was it to?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; he continued desperately, &ldquo;uncle &lsquo;n aunt &lsquo;n I.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Was any one <i>killed?</i>&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory paused and then nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your uncle?&rdquo;&mdash;alarm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no just a horse&mdash;a sorta gray horse.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At this point the Erse butler snickered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Probably killed the engine,&rdquo; he suggested. Amory would have put him on
      the rack without a scruple.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll go now,&rdquo; said Myra coolly. &ldquo;You see, Amory, the bobs were ordered
      for five and everybody was here, so we couldn&rsquo;t wait&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I couldn&rsquo;t help it, could I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So mama said for me to wait till ha&rsquo;past five. We&rsquo;ll catch the bobs
      before it gets to the Minnehaha Club, Amory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory&rsquo;s shredded poise dropped from him. He pictured the happy party
      jingling along snowy streets, the appearance of the limousine, the
      horrible public descent of him and Myra before sixty reproachful eyes, his
      apology&mdash;a real one this time. He sighed aloud.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo; inquired Myra.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing. I was just yawning. Are we going to <i>surely</i> catch up with
      &lsquo;em before they get there?&rdquo; He was encouraging a faint hope that they
      might slip into the Minnehaha Club and meet the others there, be found in
      blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, sure Mike, we&rsquo;ll catch &lsquo;em all right&mdash;let&rsquo;s hurry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He became conscious of his stomach. As they stepped into the machine he
      hurriedly slapped the paint of diplomacy over a rather box-like plan he
      had conceived. It was based upon some &ldquo;trade-lasts&rdquo; gleaned at
      dancing-school, to the effect that he was &ldquo;awful good-looking and <i>English</i>,
      sort of.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Myra,&rdquo; he said, lowering his voice and choosing his words carefully, &ldquo;I
      beg a thousand pardons. Can you ever forgive me?&rdquo; She regarded him
      gravely, his intent green eyes, his mouth, that to her thirteen-year-old,
      arrow-collar taste was the quintessence of romance. Yes, Myra could
      forgive him very easily.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why&mdash;yes&mdash;sure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked at her again, and then dropped his eyes. He had lashes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m awful,&rdquo; he said sadly. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m diff&rsquo;runt. I don&rsquo;t know why I make faux
      pas. &lsquo;Cause I don&rsquo;t care, I s&rsquo;pose.&rdquo; Then, recklessly: &ldquo;I been smoking too
      much. I&rsquo;ve got t&rsquo;bacca heart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling
      from the effect of nicotined lungs. She gave a little gasp.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, <i>Amory</i>, don&rsquo;t smoke. You&rsquo;ll stunt your <i>growth!</i>&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t care,&rdquo; he persisted gloomily. &ldquo;I gotta. I got the habit. I&rsquo;ve
      done a lot of things that if my fambly knew&rdquo;&mdash;he hesitated, giving
      her imagination time to picture dark horrors&mdash;&ldquo;I went to the
      burlesque show last week.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Myra was quite overcome. He turned the green eyes on her again. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re
      the only girl in town I like much,&rdquo; he exclaimed in a rush of sentiment.
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re simpatico.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Myra was not sure that she was, but it sounded stylish though vaguely
      improper.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thick dusk had descended outside, and as the limousine made a sudden turn
      she was jolted against him; their hands touched.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You shouldn&rsquo;t smoke, Amory,&rdquo; she whispered. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you know that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He shook his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nobody cares.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Myra hesitated.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;<i>I</i> care.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Something stirred within Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, yes, you do! You got a crush on Froggy Parker. I guess everybody
      knows that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I haven&rsquo;t,&rdquo; very slowly.
    </p>
    <p>
      A silence, while Amory thrilled. There was something fascinating about
      Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air. Myra, a little bundle
      of clothes, with strands of yellow hair curling out from under her skating
      cap.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because I&rsquo;ve got a crush, too&mdash;&rdquo; He paused, for he heard in the
      distance the sound of young laughter, and, peering through the frosted
      glass along the lamp-lit street, he made out the dark outline of the
      bobbing party. He must act quickly. He reached over with a violent, jerky
      effort, and clutched Myra&rsquo;s hand&mdash;her thumb, to be exact.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell him to go to the Minnehaha straight,&rdquo; he whispered. &ldquo;I wanta talk to
      you&mdash;I <i>got</i> to talk to you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Myra made out the party ahead, had an instant vision of her mother, and
      then&mdash;alas for convention&mdash;glanced into the eyes beside. &ldquo;Turn
      down this side street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!&rdquo;
       she cried through the speaking tube. Amory sank back against the cushions
      with a sigh of relief.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can kiss her,&rdquo; he thought. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll bet I can. I&rsquo;ll <i>bet</i> I can!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Overhead the sky was half crystalline, half misty, and the night around
      was chill and vibrant with rich tension. From the Country Club steps the
      roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of
      snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles. They lingered for a
      moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pale moons like that one&rdquo;&mdash;Amory made a vague gesture&mdash;&ldquo;make
      people mysterieuse. You look like a young witch with her cap off and her
      hair sorta mussed&rdquo;&mdash;her hands clutched at her hair&mdash;&ldquo;Oh, leave
      it, it looks <i>good</i>.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his
      dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch. A few
      years later this was to be a great stage for Amory, a cradle for many an
      emotional crisis. Now they talked for a moment about bobbing parties.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s always a bunch of shy fellas,&rdquo; he commented, &ldquo;sitting at the tail
      of the bob, sorta lurkin&rsquo; an&rsquo; whisperin&rsquo; an&rsquo; pushin&rsquo; each other off. Then
      there&rsquo;s always some crazy cross-eyed girl&rdquo;&mdash;he gave a terrifying
      imitation&mdash;&ldquo;she&rsquo;s always talkin&rsquo; <i>hard</i>, sorta, to the
      chaperon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re such a funny boy,&rdquo; puzzled Myra.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How d&rsquo;y&rsquo; mean?&rdquo; Amory gave immediate attention, on his own ground at
      last.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh&mdash;always talking about crazy things. Why don&rsquo;t you come ski-ing
      with Marylyn and I to-morrow?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t like girls in the daytime,&rdquo; he said shortly, and then, thinking
      this a bit abrupt, he added: &ldquo;But I like you.&rdquo; He cleared his throat. &ldquo;I
      like you first and second and third.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Myra&rsquo;s eyes became dreamy. What a story this would make to tell Marylyn!
      Here on the couch with this <i>wonderful</i>-looking boy&mdash;the little
      fire&mdash;the sense that they were alone in the great building&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      Myra capitulated. The atmosphere was too appropriate.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I like you the first twenty-five,&rdquo; she confessed, her voice trembling,
      &ldquo;and Froggy Parker twenty-sixth.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Froggy had fallen twenty-five places in one hour. As yet he had not even
      noticed it.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Amory, being on the spot, leaned over quickly and kissed Myra&rsquo;s cheek.
      He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if
      he had munched some new fruit. Then their lips brushed like young wild
      flowers in the wind.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;re awful,&rdquo; rejoiced Myra gently. She slipped her hand into his, her
      head drooped against his shoulder. Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust,
      loathing for the whole incident. He desired frantically to be away, never
      to see Myra again, never to kiss any one; he became conscious of his face
      and hers, of their clinging hands, and he wanted to creep out of his body
      and hide somewhere safe out of sight, up in the corner of his mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Kiss me again.&rdquo; Her voice came out of a great void.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to,&rdquo; he heard himself saying. There was another pause.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to!&rdquo; he repeated passionately.
    </p>
    <p>
      Myra sprang up, her cheeks pink with bruised vanity, the great bow on the
      back of her head trembling sympathetically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hate you!&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you ever dare to speak to me again!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo; stammered Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll tell mama you kissed me! I will too! I will too! I&rsquo;ll tell mama, and
      she won&rsquo;t let me play with you!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory rose and stared at her helplessly, as though she were a new animal
      of whose presence on the earth he had not heretofore been aware.
    </p>
    <p>
      The door opened suddenly, and Myra&rsquo;s mother appeared on the threshold,
      fumbling with her lorgnette.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; she began, adjusting it benignantly, &ldquo;the man at the desk told me
      you two children were up here&mdash;How do you do, Amory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory watched Myra and waited for the crash&mdash;but none came. The pout
      faded, the high pink subsided, and Myra&rsquo;s voice was placid as a summer
      lake when she answered her mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, we started so late, mama, that I thought we might as well&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He heard from below the shrieks of laughter, and smelled the vapid odor of
      hot chocolate and tea-cakes as he silently followed mother and daughter
      down-stairs. The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many
      girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Casey-Jones&mdash;mounted to the cab-un
    Casey-Jones&mdash;&lsquo;th his orders in his hand.
    Casey-Jones&mdash;mounted to the cab-un
    Took his farewell journey to the prom-ised land.&rdquo;
 
</pre>
    <hr />
    <p>
      SNAPSHOTS OF THE YOUNG EGOTIST
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory spent nearly two years in Minneapolis. The first winter he wore
      moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and
      dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray
      plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap. His dog, Count Del Monte, ate
      the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that pulled down over his
      face. The trouble with this one was that you breathed into it and your
      breath froze; one day the darn thing froze his cheek. He rubbed snow on
      his cheek, but it turned bluish-black just the same.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      The Count Del Monte ate a box of bluing once, but it didn&rsquo;t hurt him.
      Later, however, he lost his mind and ran madly up the street, bumping into
      fences, rolling in gutters, and pursuing his eccentric course out of
      Amory&rsquo;s life. Amory cried on his bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor little Count,&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;Oh, <i>poor</i> little <i>Count!</i>&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      After several months he suspected Count of a fine piece of emotional
      acting.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Amory and Frog Parker considered that the greatest line in literature
      occurred in Act III of &ldquo;Arsene Lupin.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They sat in the first row at the Wednesday and Saturday matinees. The line
      was:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If one can&rsquo;t be a great artist or a great soldier, the next best thing is
      to be a great criminal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Amory fell in love again, and wrote a poem. This was it:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Marylyn and Sallee,
    Those are the girls for me.
    Marylyn stands above
    Sallee in that sweet, deep love.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      He was interested in whether McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or
      second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass,
      chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was
      really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson.
    </p>
    <p>
      Among other things he read: &ldquo;For the Honor of the School,&rdquo; &ldquo;Little Women&rdquo;
       (twice), &ldquo;The Common Law,&rdquo; &ldquo;Sapho,&rdquo; &ldquo;Dangerous Dan McGrew,&rdquo; &ldquo;The Broad
      Highway&rdquo; (three times), &ldquo;The Fall of the House of Usher,&rdquo; &ldquo;Three Weeks,&rdquo;
       &ldquo;Mary Ware, the Little Colonel&rsquo;s Chum,&rdquo; &ldquo;Gunga Din,&rdquo; The Police Gazette,
      and Jim-Jam Jems.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had all the Henty biasses in history, and was particularly fond of the
      cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      School ruined his French and gave him a distaste for standard authors. His
      masters considered him idle, unreliable and superficially clever.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      He collected locks of hair from many girls. He wore the rings of several.
      Finally he could borrow no more rings, owing to his nervous habit of
      chewing them out of shape. This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous
      suspicions of the next borrower.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      All through the summer months Amory and Frog Parker went each week to the
      Stock Company. Afterward they would stroll home in the balmy air of August
      night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay
      crowd. Amory wondered how people could fail to notice that he was a boy
      marked for glory, and when faces of the throng turned toward him and
      ambiguous eyes stared into his, he assumed the most romantic of
      expressions and walked on the air cushions that lie on the asphalts of
      fourteen.
    </p>
    <p>
      Always, after he was in bed, there were voices&mdash;indefinite, fading,
      enchanting&mdash;just outside his window, and before he fell asleep he
      would dream one of his favorite waking dreams, the one about becoming a
      great half-back, or the one about the Japanese invasion, when he was
      rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world. It was always
      the becoming he dreamed of, never the being. This, too, was quite
      characteristic of Amory.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      CODE OF THE YOUNG EGOTIST
    </p>
    <p>
      Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but
      inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple
      accordion tie and a &ldquo;Belmont&rdquo; collar with the edges unassailably meeting,
      purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his
      breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy,
      a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of
      aristocratic egotism.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had realized that his best interests were bound up with those of a
      certain variant, changing person, whose label, in order that his past
      might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine. Amory marked
      himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil.
      He did not consider himself a &ldquo;strong char&rsquo;c&rsquo;ter,&rdquo; but relied on his
      facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a
      lotta deep books). He was proud of the fact that he could never become a
      mechanical or scientific genius. From no other heights was he debarred.
    </p>
    <p>
      Physically.&mdash;Amory thought that he was exceedingly handsome. He was.
      He fancied himself an athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer.
    </p>
    <p>
      Socially.&mdash;Here his condition was, perhaps, most dangerous. He
      granted himself personality, charm, magnetism, poise, the power of
      dominating all contemporary males, the gift of fascinating all women.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mentally.&mdash;Complete, unquestioned superiority.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now a confession will have to be made. Amory had rather a Puritan
      conscience. Not that he yielded to it&mdash;later in life he almost
      completely slew it&mdash;but at fifteen it made him consider himself a
      great deal worse than other boys... unscrupulousness... the desire to
      influence people in almost every way, even for evil... a certain coldness
      and lack of affection, amounting sometimes to cruelty... a shifting sense
      of honor... an unholy selfishness... a puzzled, furtive interest in
      everything concerning sex.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through
      his make-up... a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys
      usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly
      sensitiveness, or timid stupidity... he was a slave to his own moods and
      he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he
      possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect.
    </p>
    <p>
      Vanity, tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of
      people as automatons to his will, a desire to &ldquo;pass&rdquo; as many boys as
      possible and get to a vague top of the world... with this background did
      Amory drift into adolescence.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      PREPARATORY TO THE GREAT ADVENTURE
    </p>
    <p>
      The train slowed up with midsummer languor at Lake Geneva, and Amory
      caught sight of his mother waiting in her electric on the gravelled
      station drive. It was an ancient electric, one of the early types, and
      painted gray. The sight of her sitting there, slenderly erect, and of her
      face, where beauty and dignity combined, melting to a dreamy recollected
      smile, filled him with a sudden great pride of her. As they kissed coolly
      and he stepped into the electric, he felt a quick fear lest he had lost
      the requisite charm to measure up to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear boy&mdash;you&rsquo;re <i>so</i> tall... look behind and see if there&rsquo;s
      anything coming...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked left and right, she slipped cautiously into a speed of two
      miles an hour, beseeching Amory to act as sentinel; and at one busy
      crossing she made him get out and run ahead to signal her forward like a
      traffic policeman. Beatrice was what might be termed a careful driver.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You <i>are</i> tall&mdash;but you&rsquo;re still very handsome&mdash;you&rsquo;ve
      skipped the awkward age, or is that sixteen; perhaps it&rsquo;s fourteen or
      fifteen; I can never remember; but you&rsquo;ve skipped it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t embarrass me,&rdquo; murmured Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, my dear boy, what odd clothes! They look as if they were a <i>set</i>&mdash;don&rsquo;t
      they? Is your underwear purple, too?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory grunted impolitely.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You must go to Brooks&rsquo; and get some really nice suits. Oh, we&rsquo;ll have a
      talk to-night or perhaps to-morrow night. I want to tell you about your
      heart&mdash;you&rsquo;ve probably been neglecting your heart&mdash;and you don&rsquo;t
      <i>know</i>.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory thought how superficial was the recent overlay of his own
      generation. Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical
      kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken. Yet for the first few
      days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of
      superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking &ldquo;Bull&rdquo; at the
      garage with one of the chauffeurs.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses
      and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from
      foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing
      family of white cats that prowled the many flower-beds and were
      silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one
      of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr.
      Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.
      After reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tete-a-tete
      in the moonlight. He could not reconcile himself to her beauty, that was
      mother to his own, the exquisite neck and shoulders, the grace of a
      fortunate woman of thirty.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory, dear,&rdquo; she crooned softly, &ldquo;I had such a strange, weird time after
      I left you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did you, Beatrice?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When I had my last breakdown&rdquo;&mdash;she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant
      feat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The doctors told me&rdquo;&mdash;her voice sang on a confidential note&mdash;&ldquo;that
      if any man alive had done the consistent drinking that I have, he would
      have been physically <i>shattered</i>, my dear, and in his <i>grave</i>&mdash;long
      in his grave.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory winced, and wondered how this would have sounded to Froggy Parker.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; continued Beatrice tragically, &ldquo;I had dreams&mdash;wonderful
      visions.&rdquo; She pressed the palms of her hands into her eyes. &ldquo;I saw bronze
      rivers lapping marble shores, and great birds that soared through the air,
      parti-colored birds with iridescent plumage. I heard strange music and the
      flare of barbaric trumpets&mdash;what?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory had snickered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What, Amory?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I said go on, Beatrice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That was all&mdash;it merely recurred and recurred&mdash;gardens that
      flaunted coloring against which this would be quite dull, moons that
      whirled and swayed, paler than winter moons, more golden than harvest
      moons&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you quite well now, Beatrice?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite well&mdash;as well as I will ever be. I am not understood, Amory. I
      know that can&rsquo;t express it to you, Amory, but&mdash;I am not understood.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory was quite moved. He put his arm around his mother, rubbing his head
      gently against her shoulder.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor Beatrice&mdash;poor Beatrice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me about <i>you</i>, Amory. Did you have two <i>horrible</i> years?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory considered lying, and then decided against it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, Beatrice. I enjoyed them. I adapted myself to the bourgeoisie. I
      became conventional.&rdquo; He surprised himself by saying that, and he pictured
      how Froggy would have gaped.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Beatrice,&rdquo; he said suddenly, &ldquo;I want to go away to school. Everybody in
      Minneapolis is going to go away to school.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Beatrice showed some alarm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you&rsquo;re only fifteen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but everybody goes away to school at fifteen, and I <i>want</i> to,
      Beatrice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      On Beatrice&rsquo;s suggestion the subject was dropped for the rest of the walk,
      but a week later she delighted him by saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory, I have decided to let you have your way. If you still want to, you
      can go to school.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To St. Regis&rsquo;s in Connecticut.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory felt a quick excitement.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s being arranged,&rdquo; continued Beatrice. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s better that you should go
      away. I&rsquo;d have preferred you to have gone to Eton, and then to Christ
      Church, Oxford, but it seems impracticable now&mdash;and for the present
      we&rsquo;ll let the university question take care of itself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What are you going to do, Beatrice?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Heaven knows. It seems my fate to fret away my years in this country. Not
      for a second do I regret being American&mdash;indeed, I think that a
      regret typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great
      coming nation&mdash;yet&rdquo;&mdash;and she sighed&mdash;&ldquo;I feel my life should
      have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of
      greens and autumnal browns&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory did not answer, so his mother continued:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My regret is that you haven&rsquo;t been abroad, but still, as you are a man,
      it&rsquo;s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle&mdash;is
      that the right term?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory agreed that it was. She would not have appreciated the Japanese
      invasion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When do I go to school?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Next month. You&rsquo;ll have to start East a little early to take your
      examinations. After that you&rsquo;ll have a free week, so I want you to go up
      the Hudson and pay a visit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To who?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To Monsignor Darcy, Amory. He wants to see you. He went to Harrow and
      then to Yale&mdash;became a Catholic. I want him to talk to you&mdash;I
      feel he can be such a help&mdash;&rdquo; She stroked his auburn hair gently.
      &ldquo;Dear Amory, dear Amory&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dear Beatrice&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      So early in September Amory, provided with &ldquo;six suits summer underwear,
      six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one
      overcoat, winter, etc.,&rdquo; set out for New England, the land of schools.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead&mdash;large,
      college-like democracies; St. Mark&rsquo;s, Groton, St. Regis&rsquo;&mdash;recruited
      from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul&rsquo;s, with
      its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George&rsquo;s, prosperous and well-dressed;
      Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for
      social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred
      others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type,
      year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their
      vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as &ldquo;To impart a Thorough
      Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the
      boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a
      solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At St. Regis&rsquo; Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing
      confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit. The
      metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the
      sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a
      Hudson River steamboat in the early morning. Indeed, his mind was so
      crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this
      visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure. This,
      however, it did not prove to be.
    </p>
    <p>
      Monsignor Darcy&rsquo;s house was an ancient, rambling structure set on a hill
      overlooking the river, and there lived its owner, between his trips to all
      parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king
      waiting to be called to the rule of his land. Monsignor was forty-four
      then, and bustling&mdash;a trifle too stout for symmetry, with hair the
      color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality. When he came
      into a room clad in his full purple regalia from thatch to toe, he
      resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention. He
      had written two novels: one of them violently anti-Catholic, just before
      his conversion, and five years later another, in which he had attempted to
      turn all his clever jibes against Catholics into even cleverer innuendoes
      against Episcopalians. He was intensely ritualistic, startlingly dramatic,
      loved the idea of God enough to be a celibate, and rather liked his
      neighbor.
    </p>
    <p>
      Children adored him because he was like a child; youth revelled in his
      company because he was still a youth, and couldn&rsquo;t be shocked. In the
      proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu&mdash;at present he
      was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman,
      making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to
      the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it.
    </p>
    <p>
      He and Amory took to each other at first sight&mdash;the jovial,
      impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed,
      intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a
      relation of father and son within a half-hour&rsquo;s conversation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear boy, I&rsquo;ve been waiting to see you for years. Take a big chair and
      we&rsquo;ll have a chat.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve just come from school&mdash;St. Regis&rsquo;s, you know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So your mother says&mdash;a remarkable woman; have a cigarette&mdash;I&rsquo;m
      sure you smoke. Well, if you&rsquo;re like me, you loathe all science and
      mathematics&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory nodded vehemently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hate &lsquo;em all. Like English and history.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course. You&rsquo;ll hate school for a while, too, but I&rsquo;m glad you&rsquo;re going
      to St. Regis&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because it&rsquo;s a gentleman&rsquo;s school, and democracy won&rsquo;t hit you so early.
      You&rsquo;ll find plenty of that in college.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to go to Princeton,&rdquo; said Amory. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know why, but I think of
      all Harvard men as sissies, like I used to be, and all Yale men as wearing
      big blue sweaters and smoking pipes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Monsignor chuckled.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m one, you know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you&rsquo;re different&mdash;I think of Princeton as being lazy and
      good-looking and aristocratic&mdash;you know, like a spring day. Harvard
      seems sort of indoors&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And Yale is November, crisp and energetic,&rdquo; finished Monsignor.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They slipped briskly into an intimacy from which they never recovered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was for Bonnie Prince Charlie,&rdquo; announced Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course you were&mdash;and for Hannibal&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, and for the Southern Confederacy.&rdquo; He was rather sceptical about
      being an Irish patriot&mdash;he suspected that being Irish was being
      somewhat common&mdash;but Monsignor assured him that Ireland was a
      romantic lost cause and Irish people quite charming, and that it should,
      by all means, be one of his principal biasses.
    </p>
    <p>
      After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during
      which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory
      had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another
      guest. This turned out to be the Honorable Thornton Hancock, of Boston,
      ex-minister to The Hague, author of an erudite history of the Middle Ages
      and the last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He comes here for a rest,&rdquo; said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory
      as a contemporary. &ldquo;I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism,
      and I think I&rsquo;m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at
      sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory&rsquo;s early
      life. He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm.
      Monsignor called out the best that he had thought by question and
      suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand
      impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears. He and Monsignor
      held the floor, and the older man, with his less receptive, less
      accepting, yet certainly not colder mentality, seemed content to listen
      and bask in the mellow sunshine that played between these two. Monsignor
      gave the effect of sunlight to many people; Amory gave it in his youth
      and, to some extent, when he was very much older, but never again was it
      quite so mutually spontaneous.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s a radiant boy,&rdquo; thought Thornton Hancock, who had seen the splendor
      of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck&mdash;and
      afterward he added to Monsignor: &ldquo;But his education ought not to be
      intrusted to a school or college.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But for the next four years the best of Amory&rsquo;s intellect was concentrated
      on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system
      and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs
      golf-links.
    </p>
    <p>
      ... In all, a wonderful week, that saw Amory&rsquo;s mind turned inside out, a
      hundred of his theories confirmed, and his joy of life crystallized to a
      thousand ambitions. Not that the conversation was scholastic&mdash;heaven
      forbid! Amory had only the vaguest idea as to what Bernard Shaw was&mdash;but
      Monsignor made quite as much out of &ldquo;The Beloved Vagabond&rdquo; and &ldquo;Sir
      Nigel,&rdquo; taking good care that Amory never once felt out of his depth.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the trumpets were sounding for Amory&rsquo;s preliminary skirmish with his
      own generation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not sorry to go, of course. With people like us our home is where
      we are not,&rdquo; said Monsignor.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I <i>am</i> sorry&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, you&rsquo;re not. No one person in the world is necessary to you or to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-by.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      THE EGOTIST DOWN
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory&rsquo;s two years at St. Regis&rsquo;, though in turn painful and triumphant,
      had as little real significance in his own life as the American &ldquo;prep&rdquo;
       school, crushed as it is under the heel of the universities, has to
      American life in general. We have no Eton to create the self-consciousness
      of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous
      preparatory schools.
    </p>
    <p>
      He went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited
      and arrogant, and universally detested. He played football intensely,
      alternating a reckless brilliancy with a tendency to keep himself as safe
      from hazard as decency would permit. In a wild panic he backed out of a
      fight with a boy his own size, to a chorus of scorn, and a week later, in
      desperation, picked a battle with another boy very much bigger, from which
      he emerged badly beaten, but rather proud of himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was resentful against all those in authority over him, and this,
      combined with a lazy indifference toward his work, exasperated every
      master in school. He grew discouraged and imagined himself a pariah; took
      to sulking in corners and reading after lights. With a dread of being
      alone he attached a few friends, but since they were not among the elite
      of the school, he used them simply as mirrors of himself, audiences before
      which he might do that posing absolutely essential to him. He was
      unbearably lonely, desperately unhappy.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were some few grains of comfort. Whenever Amory was submerged, his
      vanity was the last part to go below the surface, so he could still enjoy
      a comfortable glow when &ldquo;Wookey-wookey,&rdquo; the deaf old housekeeper, told
      him that he was the best-looking boy she had ever seen. It had pleased him
      to be the lightest and youngest man on the first football squad; it
      pleased him when Doctor Dougall told him at the end of a heated conference
      that he could, if he wished, get the best marks in school. But Doctor
      Dougall was wrong. It was temperamentally impossible for Amory to get the
      best marks in school.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miserable, confined to bounds, unpopular with both faculty and students&mdash;that
      was Amory&rsquo;s first term. But at Christmas he had returned to Minneapolis,
      tight-lipped and strangely jubilant.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I was sort of fresh at first,&rdquo; he told Frog Parker patronizingly,
      &ldquo;but I got along fine&mdash;lightest man on the squad. You ought to go
      away to school, Froggy. It&rsquo;s great stuff.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      INCIDENT OF THE WELL-MEANING PROFESSOR
    </p>
    <p>
      On the last night of his first term, Mr. Margotson, the senior master,
      sent word to study hall that Amory was to come to his room at nine. Amory
      suspected that advice was forthcoming, but he determined to be courteous,
      because this Mr. Margotson had been kindly disposed toward him.
    </p>
    <p>
      His summoner received him gravely, and motioned him to a chair. He hemmed
      several times and looked consciously kind, as a man will when he knows
      he&rsquo;s on delicate ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory,&rdquo; he began. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve sent for you on a personal matter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, sir.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve noticed you this year and I&mdash;I like you. I think you have in
      you the makings of a&mdash;a very good man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, sir,&rdquo; Amory managed to articulate. He hated having people talk as if
      he were an admitted failure.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I&rsquo;ve noticed,&rdquo; continued the older man blindly, &ldquo;that you&rsquo;re not very
      popular with the boys.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, sir.&rdquo; Amory licked his lips.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah&mdash;I thought you might not understand exactly what it was they&mdash;ah&mdash;objected
      to. I&rsquo;m going to tell you, because I believe&mdash;ah&mdash;that when a
      boy knows his difficulties he&rsquo;s better able to cope with them&mdash;to
      conform to what others expect of him.&rdquo; He a-hemmed again with delicate
      reticence, and continued: &ldquo;They seem to think that you&rsquo;re&mdash;ah&mdash;rather
      too fresh&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory could stand no more. He rose from his chair, scarcely controlling
      his voice when he spoke.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know&mdash;oh, <i>don&rsquo;t</i> you s&rsquo;pose I know.&rdquo; His voice rose. &ldquo;I know
      what they think; do you s&rsquo;pose you have to <i>tell</i> me!&rdquo; He paused.
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m&mdash;I&rsquo;ve got to go back now&mdash;hope I&rsquo;m not rude&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He left the room hurriedly. In the cool air outside, as he walked to his
      house, he exulted in his refusal to be helped.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That <i>damn</i> old fool!&rdquo; he cried wildly. &ldquo;As if I didn&rsquo;t <i>know!</i>&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He decided, however, that this was a good excuse not to go back to study
      hall that night, so, comfortably couched up in his room, he munched
      Nabiscos and finished &ldquo;The White Company.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      INCIDENT OF THE WONDERFUL GIRL
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a bright star in February. New York burst upon him on
      Washington&rsquo;s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His
      glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a
      picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights;
      but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the
      chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women&rsquo;s eyes at the Astor,
      where he and young Paskert from St. Regis&rsquo; had dinner. When they walked
      down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord
      of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder,
      he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight. Everything enchanted him. The
      play was &ldquo;The Little Millionaire,&rdquo; with George M. Cohan, and there was one
      stunning young brunette who made him sit with brimming eyes in the ecstasy
      of watching her dance.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Oh&mdash;you&mdash;wonderful girl,
    What a wonderful girl you are&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;All&mdash;your&mdash;wonderful words
    Thrill me through&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a
      crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the
      house. Oh, to fall in love like that, to the languorous magic melody of
      such a tune!
    </p>
    <p>
      The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the &lsquo;cellos sighed to the
      musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted
      back and forth in the calcium. Amory was on fire to be an habitui of
      roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that&mdash;better, that
      very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at
      his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter. When the
      curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in
      front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to
      hear:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a <i>remarkable</i>-looking boy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This took his mind off the play, and he wondered if he really did seem
      handsome to the population of New York.
    </p>
    <p>
      Paskert and he walked in silence toward their hotel. The former was the
      first to speak. His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice broke in in a
      melancholy strain on Amory&rsquo;s musings:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;d marry that girl to-night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was no need to ask what girl he referred to.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;d be proud to take her home and introduce her to my people,&rdquo; continued
      Paskert.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory was distinctly impressed. He wished he had said it instead of
      Paskert. It sounded so mature.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wonder about actresses; are they all pretty bad?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, <i>sir</i>, not by a darn sight,&rdquo; said the worldly youth with
      emphasis, &ldquo;and I know that girl&rsquo;s as good as gold. I can tell.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They wandered on, mixing in the Broadway crowd, dreaming on the music that
      eddied out of the cafes. New faces flashed on and off like myriad lights,
      pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement. Amory
      watched them in fascination. He was planning his life. He was going to
      live in New York, and be known at every restaurant and cafe, wearing a
      dress-suit from early evening to early morning, sleeping away the dull
      hours of the forenoon.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, <i>sir</i>, I&rsquo;d marry that girl to-night!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      HEROIC IN GENERAL TONE
    </p>
    <p>
      October of his second and last year at St. Regis&rsquo; was a high point in
      Amory&rsquo;s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy,
      exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at
      quarter-back, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles,
      calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious
      whisper, yet found time to revel in the blood-stained bandage around his
      head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and
      aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the
      November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the
      prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted
      Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into
      the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of
      cheers... finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end,
      twisting, changing pace, straight-arming... falling behind the Groton goal
      with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SLICKER
    </p>
    <p>
      From the scoffing superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked
      back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before. He was changed
      as completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed. Amory plus Beatrice
      plus two years in Minneapolis&mdash;these had been his ingredients when he
      entered St. Regis&rsquo;. But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough
      overlay to conceal the &ldquo;Amory plus Beatrice&rdquo; from the ferreting eyes of a
      boarding-school, so St. Regis&rsquo; had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of
      him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the
      fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis&rsquo; and Amory were unconscious of the
      fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those
      qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose,
      his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter
      of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarter-back, a clever
      actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see
      impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long
      ago been contemptible weaknesses.
    </p>
    <p>
      After the football season he slumped into dreamy content. The night of the
      pre-holiday dance he slipped away and went early to bed for the pleasure
      of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his
      window. Many nights he lay there dreaming awake of secret cafes in Mont
      Martre, where ivory women delved in romantic mysteries with diplomats and
      soldiers of fortune, while orchestras played Hungarian waltzes and the air
      was thick and exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure. In the
      spring he read &ldquo;L&rsquo;Allegro,&rdquo; by request, and was inspired to lyrical
      outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan. He moved his
      bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out
      to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form
      house. Seating himself in this he would pump higher and higher until he
      got the effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping
      satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the
      streets of Eastchester. As the swing reached its highest point, Arcady
      really lay just over the brow of a certain hill, where the brown road
      dwindled out of sight in a golden dot.
    </p>
    <p>
      He read voluminously all spring, the beginning of his eighteenth year:
      &ldquo;The Gentleman from Indiana,&rdquo; &ldquo;The New Arabian Nights,&rdquo; &ldquo;The Morals of
      Marcus Ordeyne,&rdquo; &ldquo;The Man Who Was Thursday,&rdquo; which he liked without
      understanding; &ldquo;Stover at Yale,&rdquo; that became somewhat of a text-book;
      &ldquo;Dombey and Son,&rdquo; because he thought he really should read better stuff;
      Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim
      complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling. Of all his class work
      only &ldquo;L&rsquo;Allegro&rdquo; and some quality of rigid clarity in solid geometry
      stirred his languid interest.
    </p>
    <p>
      As June drew near, he felt the need of conversation to formulate his own
      ideas, and, to his surprise, found a co-philosopher in Rahill, the
      president of the sixth form. In many a talk, on the highroad or lying
      belly-down along the edge of the baseball diamond, or late at night with
      their cigarettes glowing in the dark, they threshed out the questions of
      school, and there was developed the term &ldquo;slicker.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Got tobacco?&rdquo; whispered Rahill one night, putting his head inside the
      door five minutes after lights.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m coming in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take a couple of pillows and lie in the window-seat, why don&rsquo;t you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory sat up in bed and lit a cigarette while Rahill settled for a
      conversation. Rahill&rsquo;s favorite subject was the respective futures of the
      sixth form, and Amory never tired of outlining them for his benefit.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ted Converse? &lsquo;At&rsquo;s easy. He&rsquo;ll fail his exams, tutor all summer at
      Harstrum&rsquo;s, get into Sheff with about four conditions, and flunk out in
      the middle of the freshman year. Then he&rsquo;ll go back West and raise hell
      for a year or so; finally his father will make him go into the paint
      business. He&rsquo;ll marry and have four sons, all bone heads. He&rsquo;ll always
      think St. Regis&rsquo;s spoiled him, so he&rsquo;ll send his sons to day school in
      Portland. He&rsquo;ll die of locomotor ataxia when he&rsquo;s forty-one, and his wife
      will give a baptizing stand or whatever you call it to the Presbyterian
      Church, with his name on it&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hold up, Amory. That&rsquo;s too darned gloomy. How about yourself?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m in a superior class. You are, too. We&rsquo;re philosophers.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sure you are. You&rsquo;ve got a darn good head on you.&rdquo; But Amory knew that
      nothing in the abstract, no theory or generality, ever moved Rahill until
      he stubbed his toe upon the concrete minutiae of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Haven&rsquo;t,&rdquo; insisted Rahill. &ldquo;I let people impose on me here and don&rsquo;t get
      anything out of it. I&rsquo;m the prey of my friends, damn it&mdash;do their
      lessons, get &lsquo;em out of trouble, pay &lsquo;em stupid summer visits, and always
      entertain their kid sisters; keep my temper when they get selfish and then
      they think they pay me back by voting for me and telling me I&rsquo;m the &lsquo;big
      man&rsquo; of St. Regis&rsquo;s. I want to get where everybody does their own work and
      I can tell people where to go. I&rsquo;m tired of being nice to every poor fish
      in school.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not a slicker,&rdquo; said Amory suddenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A what?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A slicker.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What the devil&rsquo;s that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, it&rsquo;s something that&mdash;that&mdash;there&rsquo;s a lot of them. You&rsquo;re
      not one, and neither am I, though I am more than you are.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who is one? What makes you one?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory considered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why&mdash;why, I suppose that the <i>sign</i> of it is when a fellow
      slicks his hair back with water.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Like Carstairs?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;sure. He&rsquo;s a slicker.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They spent two evenings getting an exact definition. The slicker was
      good-looking or clean-looking; he had brains, social brains, that is, and
      he used all means on the broad path of honesty to get ahead, be popular,
      admired, and never in trouble. He dressed well, was particularly neat in
      appearance, and derived his name from the fact that his hair was
      inevitably worn short, soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and
      slicked back as the current of fashion dictated. The slickers of that year
      had adopted tortoise-shell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and
      this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed
      one. The slicker seemed distributed through school, always a little wiser
      and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and
      keeping his cleverness carefully concealed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory found the slicker a most valuable classification until his junior
      year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that
      it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality. Amory&rsquo;s
      secret ideal had all the slicker qualifications, but, in addition, courage
      and tremendous brains and talents&mdash;also Amory conceded him a bizarre
      streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper.
    </p>
    <p>
      This was a first real break from the hypocrisy of school tradition. The
      slicker was a definite element of success, differing intrinsically from
      the prep school &ldquo;big man.&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;THE SLICKER&rdquo;
 
 1. Clever sense of social values.

 2. Dresses well.  Pretends that dress is superficial&mdash;but knows that it isn&rsquo;t.

 3. Goes into such activities as he can shine in.

 4. Gets to college and is, in a worldly way, successful.

 5. Hair slicked.
</pre>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;THE BIG MAN&rdquo;
 
 1. Inclined to stupidity and unconscious of social values.

 2. Thinks dress is superficial, and is inclined to be
    careless about it.

 3. Goes out for everything from a sense of duty.

 4. Gets to college and has a problematical future.  Feels lost
    without his circle, and always says that school days were
    happiest, after all.  Goes back to school and makes speeches
    about what St. Regis&rsquo;s boys are doing.

 5. Hair not slicked.
</pre>
    <p>
      Amory had decided definitely on Princeton, even though he would be the
      only boy entering that year from St. Regis&rsquo;. Yale had a romance and
      glamour from the tales of Minneapolis, and St. Regis&rsquo; men who had been
      &ldquo;tapped for Skull and Bones,&rdquo; but Princeton drew him most, with its
      atmosphere of bright colors and its alluring reputation as the pleasantest
      country club in America. Dwarfed by the menacing college exams, Amory&rsquo;s
      school days drifted into the past. Years afterward, when he went back to
      St. Regis&rsquo;, he seemed to have forgotten the successes of sixth-form year,
      and to be able to picture himself only as the unadjustable boy who had
      hurried down corridors, jeered at by his rabid contemporaries mad with
      common sense.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0002" id="link2HCH0002">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 2. Spires and Gargoyles
    </h2>
    <p>
      At first Amory noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the
      long, green swards, dancing on the leaded window-panes, and swimming
      around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls. Gradually he
      realized that he was really walking up University Place, self-conscious
      about his suitcase, developing a new tendency to glare straight ahead when
      he passed any one. Several times he could have sworn that men turned to
      look at him critically. He wondered vaguely if there was something the
      matter with his clothes, and wished he had shaved that morning on the
      train. He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these
      white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors,
      judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled.
    </p>
    <p>
      He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at
      present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen
      freshmen. After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a
      tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became
      horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a
      hat. He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging
      bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display
      of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of
      Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign &ldquo;Jigger
      Shop&rdquo; over a confectionary window. This sounded familiar, so he sauntered
      in and took a seat on a high stool.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Chocolate sundae,&rdquo; he told a colored person.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Double chocolate jiggah? Anything else?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why&mdash;yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Bacon bun?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why&mdash;yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He munched four of these, finding them of pleasing savor, and then
      consumed another double-chocolate jigger before ease descended upon him.
      After a cursory inspection of the pillow-cases, leather pennants, and
      Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau
      Street with his hands in his pockets. Gradually he was learning to
      distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the
      freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday. Those who were
      too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train
      brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless,
      white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift
      endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from
      brand-new pipes. By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals
      were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to
      look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he
      could analyze the prevalent facial expression.
    </p>
    <p>
      At five o&rsquo;clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated
      to his house to see if any one else had arrived. Having climbed the
      rickety stairs he scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was
      hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and
      tiger pictures. There was a tap at the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come in!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A slim face with gray eyes and a humorous smile appeared in the doorway.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Got a hammer?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;sorry. Maybe Mrs. Twelve, or whatever she goes by, has one.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The stranger advanced into the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You an inmate of this asylum?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Awful barn for the rent we pay.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory had to agree that it was.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thought of the campus,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;but they say there&rsquo;s so few freshmen
      that they&rsquo;re lost. Have to sit around and study for something to do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The gray-eyed man decided to introduce himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My name&rsquo;s Holiday.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Blaine&rsquo;s my name.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They shook hands with the fashionable low swoop. Amory grinned.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where&rsquo;d you prep?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Andover&mdash;where did you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;St. Regis&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, did you? I had a cousin there.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They discussed the cousin thoroughly, and then Holiday announced that he
      was to meet his brother for dinner at six.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come along and have a bite with us.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At the Kenilworth Amory met Burne Holiday&mdash;he of the gray eyes was
      Kerry&mdash;and during a limpid meal of thin soup and anaemic vegetables
      they stared at the other freshmen, who sat either in small groups looking
      very ill at ease, or in large groups seeming very much at home.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hear Commons is pretty bad,&rdquo; said Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s the rumor. But you&rsquo;ve got to eat there&mdash;or pay anyways.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Crime!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Imposition!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, at Princeton you&rsquo;ve got to swallow everything the first year. It&rsquo;s
      like a damned prep school.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory agreed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lot of pep, though,&rdquo; he insisted. &ldquo;I wouldn&rsquo;t have gone to Yale for a
      million.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Me either.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You going out for anything?&rdquo; inquired Amory of the elder brother.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not me&mdash;Burne here is going out for the Prince&mdash;the Daily
      Princetonian, you know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You going out for anything?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why&mdash;yes. I&rsquo;m going to take a whack at freshman football.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Play at St. Regis&rsquo;s?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Some,&rdquo; admitted Amory depreciatingly, &ldquo;but I&rsquo;m getting so damned thin.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not thin.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I used to be stocky last fall.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      After supper they attended the movies, where Amory was fascinated by the
      glib comments of a man in front of him, as well as by the wild yelling and
      shouting.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yoho!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, honey-baby&mdash;you&rsquo;re so big and strong, but oh, so gentle!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Clinch!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Clinch!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Kiss her, kiss &lsquo;at lady, quick!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh-h-h&mdash;!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A group began whistling &ldquo;By the Sea,&rdquo; and the audience took it up noisily.
      This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping
      and then by an endless, incoherent dirge.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Oh-h-h-h-h
    She works in a Jam Factoree
    And&mdash;that-may-be-all-right
    But you can&rsquo;t-fool-me
    For I know&mdash;DAMN&mdash;WELL
    That she DON&rsquo;T-make-jam-all-night!
    Oh-h-h-h!&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      As they pushed out, giving and receiving curious impersonal glances, Amory
      decided that he liked the movies, wanted to enjoy them as the row of upper
      classmen in front had enjoyed them, with their arms along the backs of the
      seats, their comments Gaelic and caustic, their attitude a mixture of
      critical wit and tolerant amusement.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Want a sundae&mdash;I mean a jigger?&rdquo; asked Kerry.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They suppered heavily and then, still sauntering, eased back to 12.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wonderful night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a whiz.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You men going to unpack?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Guess so. Come on, Burne.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory decided to sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good
      night.
    </p>
    <p>
      The great tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge
      of twilight. The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and,
      weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a
      song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient,
      infinitely regretful.
    </p>
    <p>
      He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth
      Tarkington&rsquo;s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and
      singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched
      undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx
      broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered,
      swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Going back&mdash;going back,
    Going&mdash;back&mdash;to&mdash;Nas-sau&mdash;Hall,
    Going back&mdash;going back&mdash;
    To the&mdash;Best&mdash;Old&mdash;Place&mdash;of&mdash;All.
    Going back&mdash;going back,
    From all&mdash;this&mdash;earth-ly&mdash;ball,
    We&rsquo;ll&mdash;clear&mdash;the&mdash;track&mdash;as&mdash;we&mdash;go&mdash;back&mdash;
    Going&mdash;back&mdash;to&mdash;Nas-sau&mdash;Hall!&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Amory closed his eyes as the ghostly procession drew near. The song soared
      so high that all dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody
      triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic
      chorus. Then Amory opened his eyes, half afraid that sight would spoil the
      rich illusion of harmony.
    </p>
    <p>
      He sighed eagerly. There at the head of the white platoon marched Allenby,
      the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the
      hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were
      expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines.
    </p>
    <p>
      Fascinated, Amory watched each rank of linked arms as it came abreast, the
      faces indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of
      triumph&mdash;and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell
      Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus.
    </p>
    <p>
      The minutes passed and Amory sat there very quietly. He regretted the rule
      that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to
      ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a
      dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic
      snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging
      the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness&mdash;West
      and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and
      arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite
      content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear
      blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers.
    </p>
    <p>
      From the first he loved Princeton&mdash;its lazy beauty, its half-grasped
      significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome,
      prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that
      pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the
      jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected some one from Hill
      School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey
      star from St. Paul&rsquo;s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it
      never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named,
      never really admitted, of the bogey &ldquo;Big Man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis&rsquo;, watched the crowds
      form and widen and form again; St. Paul&rsquo;s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at
      certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners
      of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the
      slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the
      friendly, rather puzzled high-school element. From the moment he realized
      this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the
      strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong.
    </p>
    <p>
      Having decided to be one of the gods of the class, he reported for
      freshman football practice, but in the second week, playing quarter-back,
      already paragraphed in corners of the Princetonian, he wrenched his knee
      seriously enough to put him out for the rest of the season. This forced
      him to retire and consider the situation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;12 Univee&rdquo; housed a dozen miscellaneous question-marks. There were three
      or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys from Lawrenceville, two
      amateur wild men from a New York private school (Kerry Holiday christened
      them the &ldquo;plebeian drunks&rdquo;), a Jewish youth, also from New York, and, as
      compensation for Amory, the two Holidays, to whom he took an instant
      fancy.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry,
      was a year older than his blond brother, Burne. Kerry was tall, with
      humorous gray eyes, and a sudden, attractive smile; he became at once the
      mentor of the house, reaper of ears that grew too high, censor of conceit,
      vendor of rare, satirical humor. Amory spread the table of their future
      friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean. Kerry,
      not inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being
      curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social
      system, but liked him and was both interested and amused.
    </p>
    <p>
      Burne, fair-haired, silent, and intent, appeared in the house only as a
      busy apparition, gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early
      morning to get up his work in the library&mdash;he was out for the
      Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted
      first place. In December he came down with diphtheria, and some one else
      won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly
      went after the prize again. Necessarily, Amory&rsquo;s acquaintance with him was
      in the way of three-minute chats, walking to and from lectures, so he
      failed to penetrate Burne&rsquo;s one absorbing interest and find what lay
      beneath it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory was far from contented. He missed the place he had won at St.
      Regis&rsquo;, the being known and admired, yet Princeton stimulated him, and
      there were many things ahead calculated to arouse the Machiavelli latent
      in him, could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning
      which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer,
      excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic;
      Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed
      philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an
      honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic,
      faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary
      Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position.
    </p>
    <p>
      Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was
      labelled with the damning brand of &ldquo;running it out.&rdquo; The movies thrived on
      caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out;
      talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly,
      as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in
      short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential
      man was the non-committal man, until at club elections in sophomore year
      every one should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college
      career.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him
      nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get
      any one a good deal. His vague desire to do immortal acting with the
      English Dramatic Association faded out when he found that the most
      ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a
      musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip.
      In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with
      new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go
      by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with
      Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the
      class.
    </p>
    <p>
      Many afternoons they lounged in the windows of 12 Univee and watched the
      class pass to and from Commons, noting satellites already attaching
      themselves to the more prominent, watching the lonely grind with his
      hurried step and downcast eye, envying the happy security of the big
      school groups.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;re the damned middle class, that&rsquo;s what!&rdquo; he complained to Kerry one
      day as he lay stretched out on the sofa, consuming a family of Fatimas
      with contemplative precision.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, why not? We came to Princeton so we could feel that way toward the
      small colleges&mdash;have it on &lsquo;em, more self-confidence, dress better,
      cut a swathe&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, it isn&rsquo;t that I mind the glittering caste system,&rdquo; admitted Amory. &ldquo;I
      like having a bunch of hot cats on top, but gosh, Kerry, I&rsquo;ve got to be
      one of them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But just now, Amory, you&rsquo;re only a sweaty bourgeois.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory lay for a moment without speaking.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I won&rsquo;t be&mdash;long,&rdquo; he said finally. &ldquo;But I hate to get anywhere by
      working for it. I&rsquo;ll show the marks, don&rsquo;t you know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Honorable scars.&rdquo; Kerry craned his neck suddenly at the street. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s
      Langueduc, if you want to see what he looks like&mdash;and Humbird just
      behind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory rose dynamically and sought the windows.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; he said, scrutinizing these worthies, &ldquo;Humbird looks like a
      knock-out, but this Langueduc&mdash;he&rsquo;s the rugged type, isn&rsquo;t he? I
      distrust that sort. All diamonds look big in the rough.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said Kerry, as the excitement subsided, &ldquo;you&rsquo;re a literary genius.
      It&rsquo;s up to you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wonder&rdquo;&mdash;Amory paused&mdash;&ldquo;if I could be. I honestly think so
      sometimes. That sounds like the devil, and I wouldn&rsquo;t say it to anybody
      except you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;go ahead. Let your hair grow and write poems like this guy
      D&rsquo;Invilliers in the Lit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory reached lazily at a pile of magazines on the table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Read his latest effort?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Never miss &lsquo;em. They&rsquo;re rare.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory glanced through the issue.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello!&rdquo; he said in surprise, &ldquo;he&rsquo;s a freshman, isn&rsquo;t he?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yeah.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Listen to this! My God!
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;&lsquo;A serving lady speaks:
      Black velvet trails its folds over the day,
      White tapers, prisoned in their silver frames,
      Wave their thin flames like shadows in the wind,
      Pia, Pompia, come&mdash;come away&mdash;&rsquo; 
</pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, what the devil does that mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a pantry scene.&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;&lsquo;Her toes are stiffened like a stork&rsquo;s in flight;
    She&rsquo;s laid upon her bed, on the white sheets,
    Her hands pressed on her smooth bust like a saint,
    Bella Cunizza, come into the light!&rsquo; 
</pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My gosh, Kerry, what in hell is it all about? I swear I don&rsquo;t get him at
      all, and I&rsquo;m a literary bird myself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s pretty tricky,&rdquo; said Kerry, &ldquo;only you&rsquo;ve got to think of hearses and
      stale milk when you read it. That isn&rsquo;t as pash as some of them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory tossed the magazine on the table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; he sighed, &ldquo;I sure am up in the air. I know I&rsquo;m not a regular
      fellow, yet I loathe anybody else that isn&rsquo;t. I can&rsquo;t decide whether to
      cultivate my mind and be a great dramatist, or to thumb my nose at the
      Golden Treasury and be a Princeton slicker.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why decide?&rdquo; suggested Kerry. &ldquo;Better drift, like me. I&rsquo;m going to sail
      into prominence on Burne&rsquo;s coat-tails.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t drift&mdash;I want to be interested. I want to pull strings, even
      for somebody else, or be Princetonian chairman or Triangle president. I
      want to be admired, Kerry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re thinking too much about yourself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory sat up at this.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. I&rsquo;m thinking about you, too. We&rsquo;ve got to get out and mix around the
      class right now, when it&rsquo;s fun to be a snob. I&rsquo;d like to bring a sardine
      to the prom in June, for instance, but I wouldn&rsquo;t do it unless I could be
      damn debonaire about it&mdash;introduce her to all the prize
      parlor-snakes, and the football captain, and all that simple stuff.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory,&rdquo; said Kerry impatiently, &ldquo;you&rsquo;re just going around in a circle. If
      you want to be prominent, get out and try for something; if you don&rsquo;t,
      just take it easy.&rdquo; He yawned. &ldquo;Come on, let&rsquo;s let the smoke drift off.
      We&rsquo;ll go down and watch football practice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would
      inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract
      joy from 12 Univee.
    </p>
    <p>
      They filled the Jewish youth&rsquo;s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas
      all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory&rsquo;s room, to
      the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the
      effects of the plebeian drunks&mdash;pictures, books, and furniture&mdash;in
      the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the
      transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed
      beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they
      played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the
      occasion of one man&rsquo;s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne
      for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober,
      Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and
      called, shame-faced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Say, who are all these women?&rdquo; demanded Kerry one day, protesting at the
      size of Amory&rsquo;s mail. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve been looking at the postmarks lately&mdash;Farmington
      and Dobbs and Westover and Dana Hall&mdash;what&rsquo;s the idea?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory grinned.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All from the Twin Cities.&rdquo; He named them off. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s Marylyn De Witt&mdash;she&rsquo;s
      pretty, got a car of her own and that&rsquo;s damn convenient; there&rsquo;s Sally
      Weatherby&mdash;she&rsquo;s getting too fat; there&rsquo;s Myra St. Claire, she&rsquo;s an
      old flame, easy to kiss if you like it&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What line do you throw &lsquo;em?&rdquo; demanded Kerry. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve tried everything, and
      the mad wags aren&rsquo;t even afraid of me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re the &lsquo;nice boy&rsquo; type,&rdquo; suggested Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s just it. Mother always feels the girl is safe if she&rsquo;s with me.
      Honestly, it&rsquo;s annoying. If I start to hold somebody&rsquo;s hand, they laugh at
      me, and let me, just as if it wasn&rsquo;t part of them. As soon as I get hold
      of a hand they sort of disconnect it from the rest of them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sulk,&rdquo; suggested Amory. &ldquo;Tell &lsquo;em you&rsquo;re wild and have &lsquo;em reform you&mdash;go
      home furious&mdash;come back in half an hour&mdash;startle &lsquo;em.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Kerry shook his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No chance. I wrote a St. Timothy girl a really loving letter last year.
      In one place I got rattled and said: &lsquo;My God, how I love you!&rsquo; She took a
      nail scissors, clipped out the &lsquo;My God&rsquo; and showed the rest of the letter
      all over school. Doesn&rsquo;t work at all. I&rsquo;m just &lsquo;good old Kerry&rsquo; and all
      that rot.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory smiled and tried to picture himself as &ldquo;good old Amory.&rdquo; He failed
      completely.
    </p>
    <p>
      February dripped snow and rain, the cyclonic freshman mid-years passed,
      and life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful. Once a day
      Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at
      &ldquo;Joe&rsquo;s,&rdquo; accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage. The latter was a
      quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared
      the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire
      class had gone to Yale. &ldquo;Joe&rsquo;s&rdquo; was unaesthetic and faintly unsanitary,
      but a limitless charge account could be opened there, a convenience that
      Amory appreciated. His father had been experimenting with mining stocks
      and, in consequence, his allowance, while liberal, was not at all what he
      had expected.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Joe&rsquo;s&rdquo; had the additional advantage of seclusion from curious upper-class
      eyes, so at four each afternoon Amory, accompanied by friend or book, went
      up to experiment with his digestion. One day in March, finding that all
      the tables were occupied, he slipped into a chair opposite a freshman who
      bent intently over a book at the last table. They nodded briefly. For
      twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading &ldquo;Mrs. Warren&rsquo;s
      Profession&rdquo; (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in
      the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his
      volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks.
    </p>
    <p>
      By and by Amory&rsquo;s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher&rsquo;s book. He
      spelled out the name and title upside down&mdash;&ldquo;Marpessa,&rdquo; by Stephen
      Phillips. This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been
      confined to such Sunday classics as &ldquo;Come into the Garden, Maude,&rdquo; and
      what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Moved to address his vis-a-vis, he simulated interest in his book for a
      moment, and then exclaimed aloud as if involuntarily:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ha! Great stuff!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The other freshman looked up and Amory registered artificial
      embarrassment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you referring to your bacon buns?&rdquo; His cracked, kindly voice went
      well with the large spectacles and the impression of a voluminous keenness
      that he gave.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; Amory answered. &ldquo;I was referring to Bernard Shaw.&rdquo; He turned the
      book around in explanation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve never read any Shaw. I&rsquo;ve always meant to.&rdquo; The boy paused and then
      continued: &ldquo;Did you ever read Stephen Phillips, or do you like poetry?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, indeed,&rdquo; Amory affirmed eagerly. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve never read much of Phillips,
      though.&rdquo; (He had never heard of any Phillips except the late David
      Graham.)
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s pretty fair, I think. Of course he&rsquo;s a Victorian.&rdquo; They sallied into
      a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves,
      and Amory&rsquo;s companion proved to be none other than &ldquo;that awful highbrow,
      Thomas Parke D&rsquo;Invilliers,&rdquo; who signed the passionate love-poems in the
      Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes,
      and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much
      conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest.
      Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met any one
      who did; if only that St. Paul&rsquo;s crowd at the next table would not mistake
      <i>him</i> for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously.
      They didn&rsquo;t seem to be noticing, so he let himself go, discussed books by
      the dozens&mdash;books he had read, read about, books he had never heard
      of, rattling off lists of titles with the facility of a Brentano&rsquo;s clerk.
      D&rsquo;Invilliers was partially taken in and wholly delighted. In a
      good-natured way he had almost decided that Princeton was one part deadly
      Philistines and one part deadly grinds, and to find a person who could
      mention Keats without stammering, yet evidently washed his hands, was
      rather a treat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ever read any Oscar Wilde?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. Who wrote it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a man&mdash;don&rsquo;t you know?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, surely.&rdquo; A faint chord was struck in Amory&rsquo;s memory. &ldquo;Wasn&rsquo;t the
      comic opera, &lsquo;Patience,&rsquo; written about him?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, that&rsquo;s the fella. I&rsquo;ve just finished a book of his, &lsquo;The Picture of
      Dorian Gray,&rsquo; and I certainly wish you&rsquo;d read it. You&rsquo;d like it. You can
      borrow it if you want to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, I&rsquo;d like it a lot&mdash;thanks.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you want to come up to the room? I&rsquo;ve got a few other books.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory hesitated, glanced at the St. Paul&rsquo;s group&mdash;one of them was the
      magnificent, exquisite Humbird&mdash;and he considered how determinate the
      addition of this friend would be. He never got to the stage of making them
      and getting rid of them&mdash;he was not hard enough for that&mdash;so he
      measured Thomas Parke D&rsquo;Invilliers&rsquo; undoubted attractions and value
      against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he
      fancied glared from the next table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I&rsquo;ll go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      So he found &ldquo;Dorian Gray&rdquo; and the &ldquo;Mystic and Somber Dolores&rdquo; and the
      &ldquo;Belle Dame sans Merci&rdquo;; for a month was keen on naught else. The world
      became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton
      through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne&mdash;or &ldquo;Fingal
      O&rsquo;Flaherty&rdquo; and &ldquo;Algernon Charles,&rdquo; as he called them in precieuse jest.
      He read enormously every night&mdash;Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero,
      Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh
      Benson, the Savoy Operas&mdash;just a heterogeneous mixture, for he
      suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tom D&rsquo;Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory
      saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom&rsquo;s
      room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an
      auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains. Amory liked him for being
      clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation. In fact, Amory did
      most of the strutting and tried painfully to make every remark an epigram,
      than which, if one is content with ostensible epigrams, there are many
      feats harder. 12 Univee was amused. Kerry read &ldquo;Dorian Gray&rdquo; and simulated
      Lord Henry, following Amory about, addressing him as &ldquo;Dorian&rdquo; and
      pretending to encourage in him wicked fancies and attenuated tendencies to
      ennui. When he carried it into Commons, to the amazement of the others at
      table, Amory became furiously embarrassed, and after that made epigrams
      only before D&rsquo;Invilliers or a convenient mirror.
    </p>
    <p>
      One day Tom and Amory tried reciting their own and Lord Dunsany&rsquo;s poems to
      the music of Kerry&rsquo;s graphophone.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Chant!&rdquo; cried Tom. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t recite! Chant!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory, who was performing, looked annoyed, and claimed that he needed a
      record with less piano in it. Kerry thereupon rolled on the floor in
      stifled laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Put on &lsquo;Hearts and Flowers&rsquo;!&rdquo; he howled. &ldquo;Oh, my Lord, I&rsquo;m going to cast
      a kitten.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shut off the damn graphophone,&rdquo; Amory cried, rather red in the face. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m
      not giving an exhibition.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In the meanwhile Amory delicately kept trying to awaken a sense of the
      social system in D&rsquo;Invilliers, for he knew that this poet was really more
      conventional than he, and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of
      conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular. But the
      liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in
      fact D&rsquo;Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself
      to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee. This
      caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them &ldquo;Doctor
      Johnson and Boswell.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was
      afraid of him as a highbrow. Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to
      the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and
      would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on
      Amory&rsquo;s sofa and listened:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Asleep or waking is it? for her neck
    Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck
    Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out;
    Soft and stung softly&mdash;fairer for a fleck...&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s good,&rdquo; Kerry would say softly. &ldquo;It pleases the elder Holiday.
      That&rsquo;s a great poet, I guess.&rdquo; Tom, delighted at an audience, would ramble
      through the &ldquo;Poems and Ballades&rdquo; until Kerry and Amory knew them almost as
      well as he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory took to writing poetry on spring afternoons, in the gardens of the
      big estates near Princeton, while swans made effective atmosphere in the
      artificial pools, and slow clouds sailed harmoniously above the willows.
      May came too soon, and suddenly unable to bear walls, he wandered the
      campus at all hours through starlight and rain.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      A DAMP SYMBOLIC INTERLUDE
    </p>
    <p>
      The night mist fell. From the moon it rolled, clustered about the spires
      and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were
      still in lofty aspiration toward the sky. Figures that dotted the day like
      ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground.
      The Gothic halls and cloisters were infinitely more mysterious as they
      loomed suddenly out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares
      of yellow light. Indefinitely from somewhere a bell boomed the
      quarter-hour, and Amory, pausing by the sun-dial, stretched himself out
      full length on the damp grass. The cool bathed his eyes and slowed the
      flight of time&mdash;time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy
      April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights.
      Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in
      melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate
      consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls
      and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages.
    </p>
    <p>
      The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire,
      yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the
      morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance
      of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession. He
      liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was
      peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to
      him. The silent stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional
      late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and
      the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Damn it all,&rdquo; he whispered aloud, wetting his hands in the damp and
      running them through his hair. &ldquo;Next year I work!&rdquo; Yet he knew that where
      now the spirit of spires and towers made him dreamily acquiescent, it
      would then overawe him. Where now he realized only his own inconsequence,
      effort would make him aware of his own impotency and insufficiency.
    </p>
    <p>
      The college dreamed on&mdash;awake. He felt a nervous excitement that
      might have been the very throb of its slow heart. It was a stream where he
      was to throw a stone whose faint ripple would be vanishing almost as it
      left his hand. As yet he had given nothing, he had taken nothing.
    </p>
    <p>
      A belated freshman, his oilskin slicker rasping loudly, slushed along the
      soft path. A voice from somewhere called the inevitable formula, &ldquo;Stick
      out your head!&rdquo; below an unseen window. A hundred little sounds of the
      current drifting on under the fog pressed in finally on his consciousness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, God!&rdquo; he cried suddenly, and started at the sound of his voice in the
      stillness. The rain dripped on. A minute longer he lay without moving, his
      hands clinched. Then he sprang to his feet and gave his clothes a
      tentative pat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m very damn wet!&rdquo; he said aloud to the sun-dial.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      HISTORICAL
    </p>
    <p>
      The war began in the summer following his freshman year. Beyond a sporting
      interest in the German dash for Paris the whole affair failed either to
      thrill or interest him. With the attitude he might have held toward an
      amusing melodrama he hoped it would be long and bloody. If it had not
      continued he would have felt like an irate ticket-holder at a prize-fight
      where the principals refused to mix it up.
    </p>
    <p>
      That was his total reaction.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      &ldquo;HA-HA HORTENSE!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right, ponies!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shake it up!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hey, ponies&mdash;how about easing up on that crap game and shaking a
      mean hip?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hey, <i>ponies!</i>&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The coach fumed helplessly, the Triangle Club president, glowering with
      anxiety, varied between furious bursts of authority and fits of
      temperamental lassitude, when he sat spiritless and wondered how the devil
      the show was ever going on tour by Christmas.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right. We&rsquo;ll take the pirate song.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The ponies took last drags at their cigarettes and slumped into place; the
      leading lady rushed into the foreground, setting his hands and feet in an
      atmospheric mince; and as the coach clapped and stamped and tumped and
      da-da&rsquo;d, they hashed out a dance.
    </p>
    <p>
      A great, seething ant-hill was the Triangle Club. It gave a musical comedy
      every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all
      through Christmas vacation. The play and music were the work of
      undergraduates, and the club itself was the most influential of
      institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory, after an easy victory in the first sophomore Princetonian
      competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate
      Lieutenant. Every night for the last week they had rehearsed &ldquo;Ha-Ha
      Hortense!&rdquo; in the Casino, from two in the afternoon until eight in the
      morning, sustained by dark and powerful coffee, and sleeping in lectures
      through the interim. A rare scene, the Casino. A big, barnlike auditorium,
      dotted with boys as girls, boys as pirates, boys as babies; the scenery in
      course of being violently set up; the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing
      weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the
      orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune. The boy who
      writes the lyrics stands in the corner, biting a pencil, with twenty
      minutes to think of an encore; the business manager argues with the
      secretary as to how much money can be spent on &ldquo;those damn milkmaid
      costumes&rdquo;; the old graduate, president in ninety-eight, perches on a box
      and thinks how much simpler it was in his day.
    </p>
    <p>
      How a Triangle show ever got off was a mystery, but it was a riotous
      mystery, anyway, whether or not one did enough service to wear a little
      gold Triangle on his watch-chain. &ldquo;Ha-Ha Hortense!&rdquo; was written over six
      times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All
      Triangle shows started by being &ldquo;something different&mdash;not just a
      regular musical comedy,&rdquo; but when the several authors, the president, the
      coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the
      old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star
      comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and
      the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who &ldquo;absolutely won&rsquo;t shave
      twice a day, doggone it!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was one brilliant place in &ldquo;Ha-Ha Hortense!&rdquo; It is a Princeton
      tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely
      advertised &ldquo;Skull and Bones&rdquo; hears the sacred name mentioned, he must
      leave the room. It is also a tradition that the members are invariably
      successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or
      whatever they choose to amass. Therefore, at each performance of &ldquo;Ha-Ha
      Hortense!&rdquo; half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of
      the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further
      touched up by the Triangle make-up man. At the moment in the show where
      Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, &ldquo;I am a
      Yale graduate&mdash;note my Skull and Bones!&rdquo;&mdash;at this very moment
      the six vagabonds were instructed to rise <i>conspicuously</i> and leave
      the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity. It was
      claimed though never proved that on one occasion the hired Elis were
      swelled by one of the real thing.
    </p>
    <p>
      They played through vacation to the fashionable of eight cities. Amory
      liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers,
      furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of
      feminine beauty. Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended
      its loud accent&mdash;however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee
      Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage. In
      Baltimore, Princeton was at home, and every one fell in love. There was a
      proper consumption of strong waters all along the line; one man invariably
      went on the stage highly stimulated, claiming that his particular
      interpretation of the part required it. There were three private cars;
      however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the
      &ldquo;animal car,&rdquo; and where were herded the spectacled wind-jammers of the
      orchestra. Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored,
      but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there
      was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and
      grease-paint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains
      and sighs of relief.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the disbanding came, Amory set out post haste for Minneapolis, for
      Sally Weatherby&rsquo;s cousin, Isabelle Borge, was coming to spend the winter
      in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad. He remembered Isabelle only
      as a little girl with whom he had played sometimes when he first went to
      Minneapolis. She had gone to Baltimore to live&mdash;but since then she
      had developed a past.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant. Scurrying back
      to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the
      interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his
      mother not to expect him... sat in the train, and thought about himself
      for thirty-six hours.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      &ldquo;PETTING&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      On the Triangle trip Amory had come into constant contact with that great
      current American phenomenon, the &ldquo;petting party.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      None of the Victorian mothers&mdash;and most of the mothers were Victorian&mdash;had
      any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed.
      &ldquo;Servant-girls are that way,&rdquo; says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular
      daughter. &ldquo;They are kissed first and proposed to afterward.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But the Popular Daughter becomes engaged every six months between sixteen
      and twenty-two, when she arranges a match with young Hambell, of Cambell
      &amp; Hambell, who fatuously considers himself her first love, and between
      engagements the P. D. (she is selected by the cut-in system at dances,
      which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last
      kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been
      impossible: eating three-o&rsquo;clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafes,
      talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of
      mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a
      real moral let-down. But he never realized how wide-spread it was until he
      saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue.
    </p>
    <p>
      Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint
      drums down-stairs... they strut and fret in the lobby, taking another
      cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting. Then the swinging doors
      revolve and three bundles of fur mince in. The theatre comes afterward;
      then a table at the Midnight Frolic&mdash;of course, mother will be along
      there, but she will serve only to make things more secretive and brilliant
      as she sits in solitary state at the deserted table and thinks such
      entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only
      rather wearying. But the P. D. is in love again... it was odd, wasn&rsquo;t it?&mdash;that
      though there was so much room left in the taxi the P. D. and the boy from
      Williams were somehow crowded out and had to go in a separate car. Odd!
      Didn&rsquo;t you notice how flushed the P. D. was when she arrived just seven
      minutes late? But the P. D. &ldquo;gets away with it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The &ldquo;belle&rdquo; had become the &ldquo;flirt,&rdquo; the &ldquo;flirt&rdquo; had become the &ldquo;baby
      vamp.&rdquo; The &ldquo;belle&rdquo; had five or six callers every afternoon. If the P. D.,
      by some strange accident, has two, it is made pretty uncomfortable for the
      one who hasn&rsquo;t a date with her. The &ldquo;belle&rdquo; was surrounded by a dozen men
      in the intermissions between dances. Try to find the P. D. between dances,
      just <i>try</i> to find her.
    </p>
    <p>
      The same girl... deep in an atmosphere of jungle music and the questioning
      of moral codes. Amory found it rather fascinating to feel that any popular
      girl he met before eight he might quite possibly kiss before twelve.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why on earth are we here?&rdquo; he asked the girl with the green combs one
      night as they sat in some one&rsquo;s limousine, outside the Country Club in
      Louisville.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. I&rsquo;m just full of the devil.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s be frank&mdash;we&rsquo;ll never see each other again. I wanted to come
      out here with you because I thought you were the best-looking girl in
      sight. You really don&rsquo;t care whether you ever see me again, do you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;but is this your line for every girl? What have I done to
      deserve it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you didn&rsquo;t feel tired dancing or want a cigarette or any of the
      things you said? You just wanted to be&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, let&rsquo;s go in,&rdquo; she interrupted, &ldquo;if you want to <i>analyze</i>. Let&rsquo;s
      not <i>talk</i> about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When the hand-knit, sleeveless jerseys were stylish, Amory, in a burst of
      inspiration, named them &ldquo;petting shirts.&rdquo; The name travelled from coast to
      coast on the lips of parlor-snakes and P. D.&lsquo;s.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      DESCRIPTIVE
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory was now eighteen years old, just under six feet tall and
      exceptionally, but not conventionally, handsome. He had rather a young
      face, the ingenuousness of which was marred by the penetrating green eyes,
      fringed with long dark eyelashes. He lacked somehow that intense animal
      magnetism that so often accompanies beauty in men or women; his
      personality seemed rather a mental thing, and it was not in his power to
      turn it on and off like a water-faucet. But people never forgot his face.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      ISABELLE
    </p>
    <p>
      She paused at the top of the staircase. The sensations attributed to
      divers on spring-boards, leading ladies on opening nights, and lumpy,
      husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her. She
      should have descended to a burst of drums or a discordant blend of themes
      from &ldquo;Thais&rdquo; and &ldquo;Carmen.&rdquo; She had never been so curious about her
      appearance, she had never been so satisfied with it. She had been sixteen
      years old for six months.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isabelle!&rdquo; called her cousin Sally from the doorway of the dressing-room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m ready.&rdquo; She caught a slight lump of nervousness in her throat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I had to send back to the house for another pair of slippers. It&rsquo;ll be
      just a minute.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror,
      but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of
      the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a
      glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below. Pump-shod in
      uniform black, they gave no hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if
      one pair were attached to Amory Blaine. This young man, not as yet
      encountered, had nevertheless taken up a considerable part of her day&mdash;the
      first day of her arrival. Coming up in the machine from the station, Sally
      had volunteered, amid a rain of question, comment, revelation, and
      exaggeration:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You remember Amory Blaine, of <i>course</i>. Well, he&rsquo;s simply mad to see
      you again. He&rsquo;s stayed over a day from college, and he&rsquo;s coming to-night.
      He&rsquo;s heard so much about you&mdash;says he remembers your eyes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This had pleased Isabelle. It put them on equal terms, although she was
      quite capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance
      advertising. But following her happy tremble of anticipation, came a
      sinking sensation that made her ask:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you mean he&rsquo;s heard about me? What sort of things?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Sally smiled. She felt rather in the capacity of a showman with her more
      exotic cousin.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He knows you&rsquo;re&mdash;you&rsquo;re considered beautiful and all that&rdquo;&mdash;she
      paused&mdash;&ldquo;and I guess he knows you&rsquo;ve been kissed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At this Isabelle&rsquo;s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe.
      She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never
      failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet&mdash;in a
      strange town it was an advantageous reputation. She was a &ldquo;Speed,&rdquo; was
      she? Well&mdash;let them find out.
    </p>
    <p>
      Out of the window Isabelle watched the snow glide by in the frosty
      morning. It was ever so much colder here than in Baltimore; she had not
      remembered; the glass of the side door was iced, the windows were shirred
      with snow in the corners. Her mind played still with one subject. Did <i>he</i>
      dress like that boy there, who walked calmly down a bustling business
      street, in moccasins and winter-carnival costume? How very <i>Western!</i>
      Of course he wasn&rsquo;t that way: he went to Princeton, was a sophomore or
      something. Really she had no distinct idea of him. An ancient snap-shot
      she had preserved in an old kodak book had impressed her by the big eyes
      (which he had probably grown up to by now). However, in the last month,
      when her winter visit to Sally had been decided on, he had assumed the
      proportions of a worthy adversary. Children, most astute of match-makers,
      plot their campaigns quickly, and Sally had played a clever correspondence
      sonata to Isabelle&rsquo;s excitable temperament. Isabelle had been for some
      time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions....
    </p>
    <p>
      They drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy
      street. Mrs. Weatherby greeted her warmly and her various younger cousins
      were produced from the corners where they skulked politely. Isabelle met
      them tactfully. At her best she allied all with whom she came in contact&mdash;except
      older girls and some women. All the impressions she made were conscious.
      The half-dozen girls she renewed acquaintance with that morning were all
      rather impressed and as much by her direct personality as by her
      reputation. Amory Blaine was an open subject. Evidently a bit light of
      love, neither popular nor unpopular&mdash;every girl there seemed to have
      had an affair with him at some time or other, but no one volunteered any
      really useful information. He was going to fall for her.... Sally had
      published that information to her young set and they were retailing it
      back to Sally as fast as they set eyes on Isabelle. Isabelle resolved
      secretly that she would, if necessary, <i>force</i> herself to like him&mdash;she
      owed it to Sally. Suppose she were terribly disappointed. Sally had
      painted him in such glowing colors&mdash;he was good-looking, &ldquo;sort of
      distinguished, when he wants to be,&rdquo; had a line, and was properly
      inconstant. In fact, he summed up all the romance that her age and
      environment led her to desire. She wondered if those were his
      dancing-shoes that fox-trotted tentatively around the soft rug below.
    </p>
    <p>
      All impressions and, in fact, all ideas were extremely kaleidoscopic to
      Isabelle. She had that curious mixture of the social and the artistic
      temperaments found often in two classes, society women and actresses. Her
      education or, rather, her sophistication, had been absorbed from the boys
      who had dangled on her favor; her tact was instinctive, and her capacity
      for love-affairs was limited only by the number of the susceptible within
      telephone distance. Flirt smiled from her large black-brown eyes and shone
      through her intense physical magnetism.
    </p>
    <p>
      So she waited at the head of the stairs that evening while slippers were
      fetched. Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the
      dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits,
      and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting
      search-light of Isabelle&rsquo;s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had
      high color to-night, and she wondered if he danced well.
    </p>
    <p>
      Down-stairs, in the club&rsquo;s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by
      the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally&rsquo;s voice
      repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black
      and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures. The name Blaine
      figured somewhere, but at first she could not place him. A very confused,
      very juvenile moment of awkward backings and bumpings followed, and every
      one found himself talking to the person he least desired to. Isabelle
      manoeuvred herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she
      had once played hop-scotch, to a seat on the stairs. A humorous reference
      to the past was all she needed. The things Isabelle could do socially with
      one idea were remarkable. First, she repeated it rapturously in an
      enthusiastic contralto with a soupcon of Southern accent; then she held it
      off at a distance and smiled at it&mdash;her wonderful smile; then she
      delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all
      this in the nominal form of dialogue. Froggy was fascinated and quite
      unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes
      that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her
      left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory. As an actress even in the fullest
      flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the
      people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist. First, he
      had auburn hair, and from her feeling of disappointment she knew that she
      had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness....
      For the rest, a faint flush and a straight, romantic profile; the effect
      set off by a close-fitting dress suit and a silk ruffled shirt of the kind
      that women still delight to see men wear, but men were just beginning to
      get tired of.
    </p>
    <p>
      During this inspection Amory was quietly watching.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t <i>you</i> think so?&rdquo; she said suddenly, turning to him,
      innocent-eyed.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a stir, and Sally led the way over to their table. Amory
      struggled to Isabelle&rsquo;s side, and whispered:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re my dinner partner, you know. We&rsquo;re all coached for each other.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Isabelle gasped&mdash;this was rather right in line. But really she felt
      as if a good speech had been taken from the star and given to a minor
      character.... She mustn&rsquo;t lose the leadership a bit. The dinner-table
      glittered with laughter at the confusion of getting places and then
      curious eyes were turned on her, sitting near the head. She was enjoying
      this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle
      of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally&rsquo;s chair, and fell
      into a dim confusion. Amory was on the other side, full of confidence and
      vanity, gazing at her in open admiration. He began directly, and so did
      Froggy:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve heard a lot about you since you wore braids&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wasn&rsquo;t it funny this afternoon&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Both stopped. Isabelle turned to Amory shyly. Her face was always enough
      answer for any one, but she decided to speak.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How&mdash;from whom?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;From everybody&mdash;for all the years since you&rsquo;ve been away.&rdquo; She
      blushed appropriately. On her right Froggy was <i>hors de combat</i>
      already, although he hadn&rsquo;t quite realized it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll tell you what I remembered about you all these years,&rdquo; Amory
      continued. She leaned slightly toward him and looked modestly at the
      celery before her. Froggy sighed&mdash;he knew Amory, and the situations
      that Amory seemed born to handle. He turned to Sally and asked her if she
      was going away to school next year. Amory opened with grape-shot.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve got an adjective that just fits you.&rdquo; This was one of his favorite
      starts&mdash;he seldom had a word in mind, but it was a curiosity
      provoker, and he could always produce something complimentary if he got in
      a tight corner.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh&mdash;what?&rdquo; Isabelle&rsquo;s face was a study in enraptured curiosity.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory shook his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know you very well yet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will you tell me&mdash;afterward?&rdquo; she half whispered.
    </p>
    <p>
      He nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll sit out.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Isabelle nodded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did any one ever tell you, you have keen eyes?&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory attempted to make them look even keener. He fancied, but he was not
      sure, that her foot had just touched his under the table. But it might
      possibly have been only the table leg. It was so hard to tell. Still it
      thrilled him. He wondered quickly if there would be any difficulty in
      securing the little den up-stairs.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      BABES IN THE WOODS
    </p>
    <p>
      Isabelle and Amory were distinctly not innocent, nor were they
      particularly brazen. Moreover, amateur standing had very little value in
      the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal
      study for years to come. She had begun as he had, with good looks and an
      excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular
      novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set.
      Isabelle had walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when
      her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most. Amory was
      proportionately less deceived. He waited for the mask to drop off, but at
      the same time he did not question her right to wear it. She, on her part,
      was not impressed by his studied air of blasé sophistication. She had
      lived in a larger city and had slightly an advantage in range. But she
      accepted his pose&mdash;it was one of the dozen little conventions of this
      kind of affair. He was aware that he was getting this particular favor now
      because she had been coached; he knew that he stood for merely the best
      game in sight, and that he would have to improve his opportunity before he
      lost his advantage. So they proceeded with an infinite guile that would
      have horrified her parents.
    </p>
    <p>
      After the dinner the dance began... smoothly. Smoothly?&mdash;boys cut in
      on Isabelle every few feet and then squabbled in the corners with: &ldquo;You
      might let me get more than an inch!&rdquo; and &ldquo;She didn&rsquo;t like it either&mdash;she
      told me so next time I cut in.&rdquo; It was true&mdash;she told every one so,
      and gave every hand a parting pressure that said: &ldquo;You know that your
      dances are <i>making</i> my evening.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better
      learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven
      o&rsquo;clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den
      off the reading-room up-stairs. She was conscious that they were a
      handsome pair, and seemed to belong distinctively in this seclusion, while
      lesser lights fluttered and chattered down-stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      Boys who passed the door looked in enviously&mdash;girls who passed only
      laughed and frowned and grew wise within themselves.
    </p>
    <p>
      They had now reached a very definite stage. They had traded accounts of
      their progress since they had met last, and she had listened to much she
      had heard before. He was a sophomore, was on the Princetonian board, hoped
      to be chairman in senior year. He learned that some of the boys she went
      with in Baltimore were &ldquo;terrible speeds&rdquo; and came to dances in states of
      artificial stimulation; most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring
      red Stutzes. A good half seemed to have already flunked out of various
      schools and colleges, but some of them bore athletic names that made him
      look at her admiringly. As a matter of fact, Isabelle&rsquo;s closer
      acquaintance with the universities was just commencing. She had bowing
      acquaintance with a lot of young men who thought she was a &ldquo;pretty kid&mdash;worth
      keeping an eye on.&rdquo; But Isabelle strung the names into a fabrication of
      gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman. Such is the power of
      young contralto voices on sink-down sofas.
    </p>
    <p>
      He asked her if she thought he was conceited. She said there was a
      difference between conceit and self-confidence. She adored self-confidence
      in men.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is Froggy a good friend of yours?&rdquo; she asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Rather&mdash;why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s a bum dancer.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory laughed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He dances as if the girl were on his back instead of in his arms.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She appreciated this.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re awfully good at sizing people up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory denied this painfully. However, he sized up several people for her.
      Then they talked about hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve got awfully nice hands,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;They look as if you played the
      piano. Do you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      I have said they had reached a very definite stage&mdash;nay, more, a very
      critical stage. Amory had stayed over a day to see her, and his train left
      at twelve-eighteen that night. His trunk and suitcase awaited him at the
      station; his watch was beginning to hang heavy in his pocket.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isabelle,&rdquo; he said suddenly, &ldquo;I want to tell you something.&rdquo; They had
      been talking lightly about &ldquo;that funny look in her eyes,&rdquo; and Isabelle
      knew from the change in his manner what was coming&mdash;indeed, she had
      been wondering how soon it would come. Amory reached above their heads and
      turned out the electric light, so that they were in the dark, except for
      the red glow that fell through the door from the reading-room lamps. Then
      he began:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know whether or not you know what you&mdash;what I&rsquo;m going to
      say. Lordy, Isabelle&mdash;this <i>sounds</i> like a line, but it isn&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said Isabelle softly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Maybe we&rsquo;ll never meet again like this&mdash;I have darned hard luck
      sometimes.&rdquo; He was leaning away from her on the other arm of the lounge,
      but she could see his eyes plainly in the dark.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll meet me again&mdash;silly.&rdquo; There was just the slightest emphasis
      on the last word&mdash;so that it became almost a term of endearment. He
      continued a bit huskily:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve fallen for a lot of people&mdash;girls&mdash;and I guess you have,
      too&mdash;boys, I mean, but, honestly, you&mdash;&rdquo; he broke off suddenly
      and leaned forward, chin on his hands: &ldquo;Oh, what&rsquo;s the use&mdash;you&rsquo;ll go
      your way and I suppose I&rsquo;ll go mine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Silence for a moment. Isabelle was quite stirred; she wound her
      handkerchief into a tight ball, and by the faint light that streamed over
      her, dropped it deliberately on the floor. Their hands touched for an
      instant, but neither spoke. Silences were becoming more frequent and more
      delicious. Outside another stray couple had come up and were experimenting
      on the piano in the next room. After the usual preliminary of
      &ldquo;chopsticks,&rdquo; one of them started &ldquo;Babes in the Woods&rdquo; and a light tenor
      carried the words into the den:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Give me your hand
    I&rsquo;ll understand
    We&rsquo;re off to slumberland.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Isabelle hummed it softly and trembled as she felt Amory&rsquo;s hand close over
      hers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isabelle,&rdquo; he whispered. &ldquo;You know I&rsquo;m mad about you. You <i>do</i> give
      a darn about me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How much do you care&mdash;do you like any one better?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No.&rdquo; He could scarcely hear her, although he bent so near that he felt
      her breath against his cheek.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isabelle, I&rsquo;m going back to college for six long months, and why
      shouldn&rsquo;t we&mdash;if I could only just have one thing to remember you by&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Close the door....&rdquo; Her voice had just stirred so that he half wondered
      whether she had spoken at all. As he swung the door softly shut, the music
      seemed quivering just outside.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Moonlight is bright,
    Kiss me good night.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      What a wonderful song, she thought&mdash;everything was wonderful
      to-night, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands
      clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close. The future vista of
      her life seemed an unending succession of scenes like this: under
      moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in
      low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees&mdash;only the boy
      might change, and this one was so nice. He took her hand softly. With a
      sudden movement he turned it and, holding it to his lips, kissed the palm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isabelle!&rdquo; His whisper blended in the music, and they seemed to float
      nearer together. Her breath came faster. &ldquo;Can&rsquo;t I kiss you, Isabelle&mdash;Isabelle?&rdquo;
       Lips half parted, she turned her head to him in the dark. Suddenly the
      ring of voices, the sound of running footsteps surged toward them. Quick
      as a flash Amory reached up and turned on the light, and when the door
      opened and three boys, the wrathy and dance-craving Froggy among them,
      rushed in, he was turning over the magazines on the table, while she sat
      without moving, serene and unembarrassed, and even greeted them with a
      welcoming smile. But her heart was beating wildly, and she felt somehow as
      if she had been deprived.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was evidently over. There was a clamor for a dance, there was a glance
      that passed between them&mdash;on his side despair, on hers regret, and
      then the evening went on, with the reassured beaux and the eternal cutting
      in.
    </p>
    <p>
      At quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a
      small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed. For an instant he lost his
      poise, and she felt a bit rattled when a satirical voice from a concealed
      wit cried:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take her outside, Amory!&rdquo; As he took her hand he pressed it a little, and
      she returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening&mdash;that
      was all.
    </p>
    <p>
      At two o&rsquo;clock back at the Weatherbys&rsquo; Sally asked her if she and Amory
      had had a &ldquo;time&rdquo; in the den. Isabelle turned to her quietly. In her eyes
      was the light of the idealist, the inviolate dreamer of Joan-like dreams.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; she answered. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t do that sort of thing any more; he asked me
      to, but I said no.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As she crept in bed she wondered what he&rsquo;d say in his special delivery
      to-morrow. He had such a good-looking mouth&mdash;would she ever&mdash;?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fourteen angels were watching o&rsquo;er them,&rdquo; sang Sally sleepily from the
      next room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Damn!&rdquo; muttered Isabelle, punching the pillow into a luxurious lump and
      exploring the cold sheets cautiously. &ldquo;Damn!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      CARNIVAL
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory, by way of the Princetonian, had arrived. The minor snobs, finely
      balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew
      nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived
      awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all
      subjects except the one of absorbing interest. Amory was amused at the
      intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in
      which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with
      unorthodox remarks.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, let me see&mdash;&rdquo; he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation,
      &ldquo;what club do you represent?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the &ldquo;nice,
      unspoilt, ingenuous boy&rdquo; very much at ease and quite unaware of the object
      of the call.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a
      document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and
      watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends
      of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must
      join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling
      disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered
      snubs of freshman year. Unknown men were elevated into importance when
      they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered &ldquo;all set&rdquo;
       found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and
      deserted, talked wildly of leaving college.
    </p>
    <p>
      In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being
      &ldquo;a damn tailor&rsquo;s dummy,&rdquo; for having &ldquo;too much pull in heaven,&rdquo; for getting
      drunk one night &ldquo;not like a gentleman, by God,&rdquo; or for unfathomable secret
      reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls.
    </p>
    <p>
      This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn,
      where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole down-stairs
      became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hi, Dibby&mdash;&lsquo;gratulations!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Goo&rsquo; boy, Tom, you got a good bunch in Cap.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Say, Kerry&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Kerry&mdash;I hear you went Tiger with all the weight-lifters!&rdquo;
       &ldquo;Well, I didn&rsquo;t go Cottage&mdash;the parlor-snakes&rsquo; delight.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid&mdash;Did he sign up the
      first day?&mdash;oh, <i>no</i>. Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle&mdash;afraid
      it was a mistake.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How&rsquo;d you get into Cap&mdash;you old roue?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Gratulations!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Gratulations yourself. Hear you got a good crowd.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When the bar closed, the party broke up into groups and streamed, singing,
      over the snow-clad campus, in a weird delusion that snobbishness and
      strain were over at last, and that they could do what they pleased for the
      next two years.
    </p>
    <p>
      Long afterward Amory thought of sophomore spring as the happiest time of
      his life. His ideas were in tune with life as he found it; he wanted no
      more than to drift and dream and enjoy a dozen new-found friendships
      through the April afternoons.
    </p>
    <p>
      Alec Connage came into his room one morning and woke him up into the
      sunshine and peculiar glory of Campbell Hall shining in the window.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wake up, Original Sin, and scrape yourself together. Be in front of
      Renwick&rsquo;s in half an hour. Somebody&rsquo;s got a car.&rdquo; He took the bureau cover
      and carefully deposited it, with its load of small articles, upon the bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where&rsquo;d you get the car?&rdquo; demanded Amory cynically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sacred trust, but don&rsquo;t be a critical goopher or you can&rsquo;t go!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think I&rsquo;ll sleep,&rdquo; Amory said calmly, resettling himself and reaching
      beside the bed for a cigarette.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sleep!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why not? I&rsquo;ve got a class at eleven-thirty.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You damned gloom! Of course, if you don&rsquo;t want to go to the coast&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      With a bound Amory was out of bed, scattering the bureau cover&rsquo;s burden on
      the floor. The coast... he hadn&rsquo;t seen it for years, since he and his
      mother were on their pilgrimage.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who&rsquo;s going?&rdquo; he demanded as he wriggled into his B. V. D.&lsquo;s.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Dick Humbird and Kerry Holiday and Jesse Ferrenby and&mdash;oh about
      five or six. Speed it up, kid!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In ten minutes Amory was devouring cornflakes in Renwick&rsquo;s, and at
      nine-thirty they bowled happily out of town, headed for the sands of Deal
      Beach.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You see,&rdquo; said Kerry, &ldquo;the car belongs down there. In fact, it was stolen
      from Asbury Park by persons unknown, who deserted it in Princeton and left
      for the West. Heartless Humbird here got permission from the city council
      to deliver it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Anybody got any money?&rdquo; suggested Ferrenby, turning around from the front
      seat.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was an emphatic negative chorus.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That makes it interesting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Money&mdash;what&rsquo;s money? We can sell the car.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Charge him salvage or something.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How&rsquo;re we going to get food?&rdquo; asked Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Honestly,&rdquo; answered Kerry, eying him reprovingly, &ldquo;do you doubt Kerry&rsquo;s
      ability for three short days? Some people have lived on nothing for years
      at a time. Read the Boy Scout Monthly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Three days,&rdquo; Amory mused, &ldquo;and I&rsquo;ve got classes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One of the days is the Sabbath.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just the same, I can only cut six more classes, with over a month and a
      half to go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Throw him out!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a long walk back.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory, you&rsquo;re running it out, if I may coin a new phrase.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hadn&rsquo;t you better get some dope on yourself, Amory?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory subsided resignedly and drooped into a contemplation of the scenery.
      Swinburne seemed to fit in somehow.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Oh, winter&rsquo;s rains and ruins are over,
      And all the seasons of snows and sins;
    The days dividing lover and lover,
      The light that loses, the night that wins;
    And time remembered is grief forgotten,
      And frosts are slain and flowers begotten,
    And in green underwood and cover,
      Blossom by blossom the spring begins.

   &ldquo;The full streams feed on flower of&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s the matter, Amory? Amory&rsquo;s thinking about poetry, about the pretty
      birds and flowers. I can see it in his eye.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I&rsquo;m not,&rdquo; he lied. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m thinking about the Princetonian. I ought to
      make up to-night; but I can telephone back, I suppose.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; said Kerry respectfully, &ldquo;these important men&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory flushed and it seemed to him that Ferrenby, a defeated competitor,
      winced a little. Of course, Kerry was only kidding, but he really mustn&rsquo;t
      mention the Princetonian.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a halcyon day, and as they neared the shore and the salt breezes
      scurried by, he began to picture the ocean and long, level stretches of
      sand and red roofs over blue sea. Then they hurried through the little
      town and it all flashed upon his consciousness to a mighty paean of
      emotion....
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, good Lord! <i>Look</i> at it!&rdquo; he cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me out, quick&mdash;I haven&rsquo;t seen it for eight years! Oh,
      gentlefolk, stop the car!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What an odd child!&rdquo; remarked Alec.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do believe he&rsquo;s a bit eccentric.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The car was obligingly drawn up at a curb, and Amory ran for the
      boardwalk. First, he realized that the sea was blue and that there was an
      enormous quantity of it, and that it roared and roared&mdash;really all
      the banalities about the ocean that one could realize, but if any one had
      told him then that these things were banalities, he would have gaped in
      wonder.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now we&rsquo;ll get lunch,&rdquo; ordered Kerry, wandering up with the crowd. &ldquo;Come
      on, Amory, tear yourself away and get practical.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll try the best hotel first,&rdquo; he went on, &ldquo;and thence and so forth.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They strolled along the boardwalk to the most imposing hostelry in sight,
      and, entering the dining-room, scattered about a table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eight Bronxes,&rdquo; commanded Alec, &ldquo;and a club sandwich and Juliennes. The
      food for one. Hand the rest around.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory ate little, having seized a chair where he could watch the sea and
      feel the rock of it. When luncheon was over they sat and smoked quietly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s the bill?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Some one scanned it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eight twenty-five.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Rotten overcharge. We&rsquo;ll give them two dollars and one for the waiter.
      Kerry, collect the small change.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The waiter approached, and Kerry gravely handed him a dollar, tossed two
      dollars on the check, and turned away. They sauntered leisurely toward the
      door, pursued in a moment by the suspicious Ganymede.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Some mistake, sir.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Kerry took the bill and examined it critically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No mistake!&rdquo; he said, shaking his head gravely, and, tearing it into four
      pieces, he handed the scraps to the waiter, who was so dumfounded that he
      stood motionless and expressionless while they walked out.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Won&rsquo;t he send after us?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Kerry; &ldquo;for a minute he&rsquo;ll think we&rsquo;re the proprietor&rsquo;s sons or
      something; then he&rsquo;ll look at the check again and call the manager, and in
      the meantime&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They left the car at Asbury and street-car&rsquo;d to Allenhurst, where they
      investigated the crowded pavilions for beauty. At four there were
      refreshments in a lunch-room, and this time they paid an even smaller per
      cent on the total cost; something about the appearance and savoir-faire of
      the crowd made the thing go, and they were not pursued.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You see, Amory, we&rsquo;re Marxian Socialists,&rdquo; explained Kerry. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t
      believe in property and we&rsquo;re putting it to the great test.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Night will descend,&rdquo; Amory suggested.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Watch, and put your trust in Holiday.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They became jovial about five-thirty and, linking arms, strolled up and
      down the boardwalk in a row, chanting a monotonous ditty about the sad sea
      waves. Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing
      off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever
      set eyes on. Her pale mouth extended from ear to ear, her teeth projected
      in a solid wedge, and she had little, squinty eyes that peeped
      ingratiatingly over the side sweep of her nose. Kerry presented them
      formally.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Name of Kaluka, Hawaiian queen! Let me present Messrs. Connage, Sloane,
      Humbird, Ferrenby, and Blaine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The girl bobbed courtesies all around. Poor creature; Amory supposed she
      had never before been noticed in her life&mdash;possibly she was
      half-witted. While she accompanied them (Kerry had invited her to supper)
      she said nothing which could discountenance such a belief.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She prefers her native dishes,&rdquo; said Alec gravely to the waiter, &ldquo;but any
      coarse food will do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while
      Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and
      grinned. Amory was content to sit and watch the by-play, thinking what a
      light touch Kerry had, and how he could transform the barest incident into
      a thing of curve and contour. They all seemed to have the spirit of it
      more or less, and it was a relaxation to be with them. Amory usually liked
      men individually, yet feared them in crowds unless the crowd was around
      him. He wondered how much each one contributed to the party, for there was
      somewhat of a spiritual tax levied. Alec and Kerry were the life of it,
      but not quite the centre. Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his
      impatient superciliousness, were the centre.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type
      of aristocrat. He was slender but well-built&mdash;black curly hair,
      straight features, and rather a dark skin. Everything he said sounded
      intangibly appropriate. He possessed infinite courage, an averagely good
      mind, and a sense of honor with a clear charm and <i>noblesse oblige</i>
      that varied it from righteousness. He could dissipate without going to
      pieces, and even his most bohemian adventures never seemed &ldquo;running it
      out.&rdquo; People dressed like him, tried to talk as he did.... Amory decided
      that he probably held the world back, but he wouldn&rsquo;t have changed him.
      ...
    </p>
    <p>
      He differed from the healthy type that was essentially middle class&mdash;he
      never seemed to perspire. Some people couldn&rsquo;t be familiar with a
      chauffeur without having it returned; Humbird could have lunched at
      Sherry&rsquo;s with a colored man, yet people would have somehow known that it
      was all right. He was not a snob, though he knew only half his class. His
      friends ranged from the highest to the lowest, but it was impossible to
      &ldquo;cultivate&rdquo; him. Servants worshipped him, and treated him like a god. He
      seemed the eternal example of what the upper class tries to be.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s like those pictures in the Illustrated London News of the English
      officers who have been killed,&rdquo; Amory had said to Alec. &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; Alec had
      answered, &ldquo;if you want to know the shocking truth, his father was a
      grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New
      York ten years ago.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory had felt a curious sinking sensation.
    </p>
    <p>
      This present type of party was made possible by the surging together of
      the class after club elections&mdash;as if to make a last desperate
      attempt to know itself, to keep together, to fight off the tightening
      spirit of the clubs. It was a let-down from the conventional heights they
      had all walked so rigidly.
    </p>
    <p>
      After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back
      along the beach to Asbury. The evening sea was a new sensation, for all
      its color and mellow age was gone, and it seemed the bleak waste that made
      the Norse sagas sad; Amory thought of Kipling&rsquo;s
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      It was still a music, though, infinitely sorrowful.
    </p>
    <p>
      Ten o&rsquo;clock found them penniless. They had suppered greatly on their last
      eleven cents and, singing, strolled up through the casinos and lighted
      arches on the boardwalk, stopping to listen approvingly to all band
      concerts. In one place Kerry took up a collection for the French War
      Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought
      some brandy in case they caught cold in the night. They finished the day
      in a moving-picture show and went into solemn systematic roars of laughter
      at an ancient comedy, to the startled annoyance of the rest of the
      audience. Their entrance was distinctly strategic, for each man as he
      entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him. Sloane, bringing
      up the rear, disclaimed all knowledge and responsibility as soon as the
      others were scattered inside; then as the irate ticket-taker rushed in he
      followed nonchalantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      They reassembled later by the Casino and made arrangements for the night.
      Kerry wormed permission from the watchman to sleep on the platform and,
      having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as
      mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a
      dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that
      marvellous moon settle on the sea.
    </p>
    <p>
      So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by street-car
      or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating
      with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an
      unsuspecting restaurateur. They had their photos taken, eight poses, in a
      quick-development store. Kerry insisted on grouping them as a &ldquo;varsity&rdquo;
       football team, and then as a tough gang from the East Side, with their
      coats inside out, and himself sitting in the middle on a cardboard moon.
      The photographer probably has them yet&mdash;at least, they never called
      for them. The weather was perfect, and again they slept outside, and again
      Amory fell unwillingly asleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sunday broke stolid and respectable, and even the sea seemed to mumble and
      complain, so they returned to Princeton via the Fords of transient
      farmers, and broke up with colds in their heads, but otherwise none the
      worse for wandering.
    </p>
    <p>
      Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not
      deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests.
      Co-ordinate geometry and the melancholy hexameters of Corneille and Racine
      held forth small allurements, and even psychology, which he had eagerly
      awaited, proved to be a dull subject full of muscular reactions and
      biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence.
      That was a noon class, and it always sent him dozing. Having found that
      &ldquo;subjective and objective, sir,&rdquo; answered most of the questions, he used
      the phrase on all occasions, and it became the class joke when, on a query
      being levelled at him, he was nudged awake by Ferrenby or Sloane to gasp
      it out.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mostly there were parties&mdash;to Orange or the Shore, more rarely to New
      York and Philadelphia, though one night they marshalled fourteen
      waitresses out of Childs&rsquo; and took them to ride down Fifth Avenue on top
      of an auto bus. They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant
      an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let
      anything interfere with their colorful ramblings. In May Amory was elected
      to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening&rsquo;s
      discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities
      for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The
      senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative
      seniors, and in view of Alec&rsquo;s football managership and Amory&rsquo;s chance of
      nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly
      justified in this presumption. Oddly enough, they both placed D&rsquo;Invilliers
      as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would
      have gaped at.
    </p>
    <p>
      All through the spring Amory had kept up an intermittent correspondence
      with Isabelle Borge, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened
      by his attempts to find new words for love. He discovered Isabelle to be
      discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped
      against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large
      spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club. During
      May he wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in
      bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled &ldquo;Part I&rdquo; and &ldquo;Part II.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Alec, I believe I&rsquo;m tired of college,&rdquo; he said sadly, as they walked
      the dusk together.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think I am, too, in a way.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All I&rsquo;d like would be a little home in the country, some warm country,
      and a wife, and just enough to do to keep from rotting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Me, too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;d like to quit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What does your girl say?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh!&rdquo; Amory gasped in horror. &ldquo;She wouldn&rsquo;t <i>think</i> of marrying...
      that is, not now. I mean the future, you know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My girl would. I&rsquo;m engaged.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you really?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. Don&rsquo;t say a word to anybody, please, but I am. I may not come back
      next year.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you&rsquo;re only twenty! Give up college?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, Amory, you were saying a minute ago&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; Amory interrupted, &ldquo;but I was just wishing. I wouldn&rsquo;t think of
      leaving college. It&rsquo;s just that I feel so sad these wonderful nights. I
      sort of feel they&rsquo;re never coming again, and I&rsquo;m not really getting all I
      could out of them. I wish my girl lived here. But marry&mdash;not a
      chance. Especially as father says the money isn&rsquo;t forthcoming as it used
      to be.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a waste these nights are!&rdquo; agreed Alec.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Amory sighed and made use of the nights. He had a snap-shot of
      Isabelle, enshrined in an old watch, and at eight almost every night he
      would turn off all the lights except the desk lamp and, sitting by the
      open windows with the picture before him, write her rapturous letters.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 ... Oh it&rsquo;s so hard to write you what I really <i>feel</i> when I
  think about you so much; you&rsquo;ve gotten to mean to me a <i>dream</i> that
  I can&rsquo;t put on paper any more.  Your last letter came and it was
  wonderful!  I read it over about six times, especially the last
  part, but I do wish, sometimes, you&rsquo;d be more <i>frank</i> and tell me
  what you really do think of me, yet your last letter was too good
  to be true, and I can hardly wait until June!  Be sure and be able
  to come to the prom.  It&rsquo;ll be fine, I think, and I want to bring
  <i>you</i> just at the end of a wonderful year.  I often think over what
  you said on that night and wonder how much you meant.  If it were
  anyone but you&mdash;but you see I <i>thought</i> you were fickle the first
  time I saw you and you are so popular and everthing that I can&rsquo;t
  imagine you really liking me <i>best</i>.

  Oh, Isabelle, dear&mdash;it&rsquo;s a wonderful night.  Somebody is playing
  &ldquo;Love Moon&rdquo; on a mandolin far across the campus, and the music
  seems to bring you into the window.  Now he&rsquo;s playing &ldquo;Good-by,
  Boys, I&rsquo;m Through,&rdquo; and how well it suits me.  For I am through
  with everything.  I have decided never to take a cocktail again,
  and I know I&rsquo;ll never again fall in love&mdash;I couldn&rsquo;t&mdash;you&rsquo;ve been
  too much a part of my days and nights to ever let me think of
  another girl.  I meet them all the time and they don&rsquo;t interest me.
  I&rsquo;m not pretending to be blasé, because it&rsquo;s not that.  It&rsquo;s just
  that I&rsquo;m in love.  Oh, <i>dearest</i> Isabelle (somehow I can&rsquo;t call you
  just Isabelle, and I&rsquo;m afraid I&rsquo;ll come out with the &ldquo;dearest&rdquo;
   before your family this June), you&rsquo;ve got to come to the prom,
  and then I&rsquo;ll come up to your house for a day and everything&rsquo;ll be
  perfect....
</pre>
    <p>
      And so on in an eternal monotone that seemed to both of them infinitely
      charming, infinitely new.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      June came and the days grew so hot and lazy that they could not worry even
      about exams, but spent dreamy evenings on the court of Cottage, talking of
      long subjects until the sweep of country toward Stony Brook became a blue
      haze and the lilacs were white around tennis-courts, and words gave way to
      silent cigarettes.... Then down deserted Prospect and along McCosh with
      song everywhere around them, up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tom D&rsquo;Invilliers and Amory walked late in those days. A gambling fever
      swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three
      o&rsquo;clock many a sultry night. After one session they came out of Sloane&rsquo;s
      room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s borrow bicycles and take a ride,&rdquo; Amory suggested.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right. I&rsquo;m not a bit tired and this is almost the last night of the
      year, really, because the prom stuff starts Monday.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They found two unlocked bicycles in Holder Court and rode out about
      half-past three along the Lawrenceville Road.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What are you going to do this summer, Amory?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t ask me&mdash;same old things, I suppose. A month or two in Lake
      Geneva&mdash;I&rsquo;m counting on you to be there in July, you know&mdash;then
      there&rsquo;ll be Minneapolis, and that means hundreds of summer hops,
      parlor-snaking, getting bored&mdash;But oh, Tom,&rdquo; he added suddenly,
      &ldquo;hasn&rsquo;t this year been slick!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; declared Tom emphatically, a new Tom, clothed by Brooks, shod by
      Franks, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve won this game, but I feel as if I never want to play
      another. You&rsquo;re all right&mdash;you&rsquo;re a rubber ball, and somehow it suits
      you, but I&rsquo;m sick of adapting myself to the local snobbishness of this
      corner of the world. I want to go where people aren&rsquo;t barred because of
      the color of their neckties and the roll of their coats.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t, Tom,&rdquo; argued Amory, as they rolled along through the
      scattering night; &ldquo;wherever you go now you&rsquo;ll always unconsciously apply
      these standards of &lsquo;having it&rsquo; or &lsquo;lacking it.&rsquo; For better or worse we&rsquo;ve
      stamped you; you&rsquo;re a Princeton type!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, then,&rdquo; complained Tom, his cracked voice rising plaintively, &ldquo;why
      do I have to come back at all? I&rsquo;ve learned all that Princeton has to
      offer. Two years more of mere pedantry and lying around a club aren&rsquo;t
      going to help. They&rsquo;re just going to disorganize me, conventionalize me
      completely. Even now I&rsquo;m so spineless that I wonder how I get away with
      it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, but you&rsquo;re missing the real point, Tom,&rdquo; Amory interrupted. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve
      just had your eyes opened to the snobbishness of the world in a rather
      abrupt manner. Princeton invariably gives the thoughtful man a social
      sense.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You consider you taught me that, don&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; he asked quizzically, eying
      Amory in the half dark.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory laughed quietly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Didn&rsquo;t I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sometimes,&rdquo; he said slowly, &ldquo;I think you&rsquo;re my bad angel. I might have
      been a pretty fair poet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on, that&rsquo;s rather hard. You chose to come to an Eastern college.
      Either your eyes were opened to the mean scrambling quality of people, or
      you&rsquo;d have gone through blind, and you&rsquo;d hate to have done that&mdash;been
      like Marty Kaye.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he agreed, &ldquo;you&rsquo;re right. I wouldn&rsquo;t have liked it. Still, it&rsquo;s
      hard to be made a cynic at twenty.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was born one,&rdquo; Amory murmured. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m a cynical idealist.&rdquo; He paused and
      wondered if that meant anything.
    </p>
    <p>
      They reached the sleeping school of Lawrenceville, and turned to ride
      back.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s good, this ride, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; Tom said presently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; it&rsquo;s a good finish, it&rsquo;s knock-out; everything&rsquo;s good to-night. Oh,
      for a hot, languorous summer and Isabelle!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you and your Isabelle! I&rsquo;ll bet she&rsquo;s a simple one... let&rsquo;s say some
      poetry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      So Amory declaimed &ldquo;The Ode to a Nightingale&rdquo; to the bushes they passed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll never be a poet,&rdquo; said Amory as he finished. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not enough of a
      sensualist really; there are only a few obvious things that I notice as
      primarily beautiful: women, spring evenings, music at night, the sea; I
      don&rsquo;t catch the subtle things like &lsquo;silver-snarling trumpets.&rsquo; I may turn
      out an intellectual, but I&rsquo;ll never write anything but mediocre poetry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They rode into Princeton as the sun was making colored maps of the sky
      behind the graduate school, and hurried to the refreshment of a shower
      that would have to serve in place of sleep. By noon the bright-costumed
      alumni crowded the streets with their bands and choruses, and in the tents
      there was great reunion under the orange-and-black banners that curled and
      strained in the wind. Amory looked long at one house which bore the legend
      &ldquo;Sixty-nine.&rdquo; There a few gray-haired men sat and talked quietly while the
      classes swept by in panorama of life.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      UNDER THE ARC-LIGHT
    </p>
    <p>
      Then tragedy&rsquo;s emerald eyes glared suddenly at Amory over the edge of
      June. On the night after his ride to Lawrenceville a crowd sallied to New
      York in quest of adventure, and started back to Princeton about twelve
      o&rsquo;clock in two machines. It had been a gay party and different stages of
      sobriety were represented. Amory was in the car behind; they had taken the
      wrong road and lost the way, and so were hurrying to catch up.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a clear night and the exhilaration of the road went to Amory&rsquo;s
      head. He had the ghost of two stanzas of a poem forming in his mind. ...
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  So the gray car crept nightward in the dark and there was no life
  stirred as it went by....  As the still ocean paths before the
  shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the
  moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping
  nightbirds cried across the air....

  A moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a
  yellow moon&mdash;then silence, where crescendo laughter fades... the
  car swung out again to the winds of June, mellowed the shadows
  where the distance grew, then crushed the yellow shadows into
  blue....
</pre>
    <p>
      They jolted to a stop, and Amory peered up, startled. A woman was standing
      beside the road, talking to Alec at the wheel. Afterward he remembered the
      harpy effect that her old kimono gave her, and the cracked hollowness of
      her voice as she spoke:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You Princeton boys?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, there&rsquo;s one of you killed here, and two others about dead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;<i>My God!</i>&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look!&rdquo; She pointed and they gazed in horror. Under the full light of a
      roadside arc-light lay a form, face downward in a widening circle of
      blood.
    </p>
    <p>
      They sprang from the car. Amory thought of the back of that head&mdash;that
      hair&mdash;that hair... and then they turned the form over.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s Dick&mdash;Dick Humbird!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Christ!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Feel his heart!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then the insistent voice of the old crone in a sort of croaking triumph:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s quite dead, all right. The car turned over. Two of the men that
      weren&rsquo;t hurt just carried the others in, but this one&rsquo;s no use.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory rushed into the house and the rest followed with a limp mass that
      they laid on the sofa in the shoddy little front parlor. Sloane, with his
      shoulder punctured, was on another lounge. He was half delirious, and kept
      calling something about a chemistry lecture at 8:10.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what happened,&rdquo; said Ferrenby in a strained voice. &ldquo;Dick was
      driving and he wouldn&rsquo;t give up the wheel; we told him he&rsquo;d been drinking
      too much&mdash;then there was this damn curve&mdash;oh, my <i>God!</i>...&rdquo;
       He threw himself face downward on the floor and broke into dry sobs.
    </p>
    <p>
      The doctor had arrived, and Amory went over to the couch, where some one
      handed him a sheet to put over the body. With a sudden hardness, he raised
      one of the hands and let it fall back inertly. The brow was cold but the
      face not expressionless. He looked at the shoe-laces&mdash;Dick had tied
      them that morning. <i>He</i> had tied them&mdash;and now he was this heavy
      white mass. All that remained of the charm and personality of the Dick
      Humbird he had known&mdash;oh, it was all so horrible and unaristocratic
      and close to the earth. All tragedy has that strain of the grotesque and
      squalid&mdash;so useless, futile... the way animals die.... Amory was
      reminded of a cat that had lain horribly mangled in some alley of his
      childhood.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Some one go to Princeton with Ferrenby.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory stepped outside the door and shivered slightly at the late night
      wind&mdash;a wind that stirred a broken fender on the mass of bent metal
      to a plaintive, tinny sound.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      CRESCENDO!
    </p>
    <p>
      Next day, by a merciful chance, passed in a whirl. When Amory was by
      himself his thoughts zigzagged inevitably to the picture of that red mouth
      yawning incongruously in the white face, but with a determined effort he
      piled present excitement upon the memory of it and shut it coldly away
      from his mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      Isabelle and her mother drove into town at four, and they rode up smiling
      Prospect Avenue, through the gay crowd, to have tea at Cottage. The clubs
      had their annual dinners that night, so at seven he loaned her to a
      freshman and arranged to meet her in the gymnasium at eleven, when the
      upper classmen were admitted to the freshman dance. She was all he had
      expected, and he was happy and eager to make that night the centre of
      every dream. At nine the upper classes stood in front of the clubs as the
      freshman torchlight parade rioted past, and Amory wondered if the
      dress-suited groups against the dark, stately backgrounds and under the
      flare of the torches made the night as brilliant to the staring, cheering
      freshmen as it had been to him the year before.
    </p>
    <p>
      The next day was another whirl. They lunched in a gay party of six in a
      private dining-room at the club, while Isabelle and Amory looked at each
      other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be
      eternal. They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on
      Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the
      hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat
      room, made old weariness wait until another day. The stag line is a most
      homogeneous mass of men. It fairly sways with a single soul. A dark-haired
      beauty dances by and there is a half-gasping sound as the ripple surges
      forward and some one sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in. Then
      when the six-foot girl (brought by Kaye in your class, and to whom he has
      been trying to introduce you all evening) gallops by, the line surges back
      and the groups face about and become intent on far corners of the hall,
      for Kaye, anxious and perspiring, appears elbowing through the crowd in
      search of familiar faces.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say, old man, I&rsquo;ve got an awfully nice&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sorry, Kaye, but I&rsquo;m set for this one. I&rsquo;ve got to cut in on a fella.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, the next one?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&mdash;ah&mdash;er&mdash;I swear I&rsquo;ve got to go cut in&mdash;look me
      up when she&rsquo;s got a dance free.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It delighted Amory when Isabelle suggested that they leave for a while and
      drive around in her car. For a delicious hour that passed too soon they
      glided the silent roads about Princeton and talked from the surface of
      their hearts in shy excitement. Amory felt strangely ingenuous and made no
      attempt to kiss her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Next day they rode up through the Jersey country, had luncheon in New
      York, and in the afternoon went to see a problem play at which Isabelle
      wept all through the second act, rather to Amory&rsquo;s embarrassment&mdash;though
      it filled him with tenderness to watch her. He was tempted to lean over
      and kiss away her tears, and she slipped her hand into his under cover of
      darkness to be pressed softly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then at six they arrived at the Borges&rsquo; summer place on Long Island, and
      Amory rushed up-stairs to change into a dinner coat. As he put in his
      studs he realized that he was enjoying life as he would probably never
      enjoy it again. Everything was hallowed by the haze of his own youth. He
      had arrived, abreast of the best in his generation at Princeton. He was in
      love and his love was returned. Turning on all the lights, he looked at
      himself in the mirror, trying to find in his own face the qualities that
      made him see clearer than the great crowd of people, that made him decide
      firmly, and able to influence and follow his own will. There was little in
      his life now that he would have changed. ... Oxford might have been a
      bigger field.
    </p>
    <p>
      Silently he admired himself. How conveniently well he looked, and how well
      a dinner coat became him. He stepped into the hall and then waited at the
      top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming. It was Isabelle, and
      from the top of her shining hair to her little golden slippers she had
      never seemed so beautiful.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isabelle!&rdquo; he cried, half involuntarily, and held out his arms. As in the
      story-books, she ran into them, and on that half-minute, as their lips
      first touched, rested the high point of vanity, the crest of his young
      egotism.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0003" id="link2HCH0003">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 3. The Egotist Considers
    </h2>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ouch! Let me go!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He dropped his arms to his sides.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s the matter?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your shirt stud&mdash;it hurt me&mdash;look!&rdquo; She was looking down at her
      neck, where a little blue spot about the size of a pea marred its pallor.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Isabelle,&rdquo; he reproached himself, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m a goopher. Really, I&rsquo;m sorry&mdash;I
      shouldn&rsquo;t have held you so close.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked up impatiently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Amory, of course you couldn&rsquo;t help it, and it didn&rsquo;t hurt much; but
      what <i>are</i> we going to do about it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;<i>Do</i> about it?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;Oh&mdash;that spot; it&rsquo;ll disappear in a
      second.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It isn&rsquo;t,&rdquo; she said, after a moment of concentrated gazing, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s still
      there&mdash;and it looks like Old Nick&mdash;oh, Amory, what&rsquo;ll we do!
      It&rsquo;s <i>just</i> the height of your shoulder.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Massage it,&rdquo; he suggested, repressing the faintest inclination to laugh.
    </p>
    <p>
      She rubbed it delicately with the tips of her fingers, and then a tear
      gathered in the corner of her eye, and slid down her cheek.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Amory,&rdquo; she said despairingly, lifting up a most pathetic face, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll
      just make my whole neck <i>flame</i> if I rub it. What&rsquo;ll I do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A quotation sailed into his head and he couldn&rsquo;t resist repeating it
      aloud.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;All the perfumes of Arabia will not whiten this little hand.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      She looked up and the sparkle of the tear in her eye was like ice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not very sympathetic.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory mistook her meaning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isabelle, darling, I think it&rsquo;ll&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t touch me!&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;Haven&rsquo;t I enough on my mind and you stand
      there and <i>laugh!</i>&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then he slipped again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, it <i>is</i> funny, Isabelle, and we were talking the other day
      about a sense of humor being&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was looking at him with something that was not a smile, rather the
      faint, mirthless echo of a smile, in the corners of her mouth.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, shut up!&rdquo; she cried suddenly, and fled down the hallway toward her
      room. Amory stood there, covered with remorseful confusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Damn!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When Isabelle reappeared she had thrown a light wrap about her shoulders,
      and they descended the stairs in a silence that endured through dinner.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isabelle,&rdquo; he began rather testily, as they arranged themselves in the
      car, bound for a dance at the Greenwich Country Club, &ldquo;you&rsquo;re angry, and
      I&rsquo;ll be, too, in a minute. Let&rsquo;s kiss and make up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Isabelle considered glumly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hate to be laughed at,&rdquo; she said finally.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I won&rsquo;t laugh any more. I&rsquo;m not laughing now, am I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, don&rsquo;t be so darned feminine.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her lips curled slightly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be anything I want.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory kept his temper with difficulty. He became aware that he had not an
      ounce of real affection for Isabelle, but her coldness piqued him. He
      wanted to kiss her, kiss her a lot, because then he knew he could leave in
      the morning and not care. On the contrary, if he didn&rsquo;t kiss her, it would
      worry him.... It would interfere vaguely with his idea of himself as a
      conqueror. It wasn&rsquo;t dignified to come off second best, <i>pleading</i>,
      with a doughty warrior like Isabelle.
    </p>
    <p>
      Perhaps she suspected this. At any rate, Amory watched the night that
      should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths
      overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those
      broken words, those little sighs....
    </p>
    <p>
      Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil&rsquo;s food in the pantry, and
      Amory announced a decision.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m leaving early in the morning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why not?&rdquo; he countered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s no need.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;However, I&rsquo;m going.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, if you insist on being ridiculous&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, don&rsquo;t put it that way,&rdquo; he objected.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&mdash;just because I won&rsquo;t let you kiss me. Do you think&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, Isabelle,&rdquo; he interrupted, &ldquo;you know it&rsquo;s not that&mdash;even
      suppose it is. We&rsquo;ve reached the stage where we either ought to kiss&mdash;or&mdash;or&mdash;nothing.
      It isn&rsquo;t as if you were refusing on moral grounds.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She hesitated.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I really don&rsquo;t know what to think about you,&rdquo; she began, in a feeble,
      perverse attempt at conciliation. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re so funny.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I thought you had a lot of self-confidence and all that; remember
      you told me the other day that you could do anything you wanted, or get
      anything you wanted?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory flushed. He <i>had</i> told her a lot of things.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, you didn&rsquo;t seem to feel so self-confident to-night. Maybe you&rsquo;re
      just plain conceited.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I&rsquo;m not,&rdquo; he hesitated. &ldquo;At Princeton&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you and Princeton! You&rsquo;d think that was the world, the way you talk!
      Perhaps you <i>can</i> write better than anybody else on your old
      Princetonian; maybe the freshmen <i>do</i> think you&rsquo;re important&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t understand&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I do,&rdquo; she interrupted. &ldquo;I <i>do</i>, because you&rsquo;re always talking
      about yourself and I used to like it; now I don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have I to-night?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s just the point,&rdquo; insisted Isabelle. &ldquo;You got all upset to-night.
      You just sat and watched my eyes. Besides, I have to think all the time
      I&rsquo;m talking to you&mdash;you&rsquo;re so critical.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I make you think, do I?&rdquo; Amory repeated with a touch of vanity.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re a nervous strain&rdquo;&mdash;this emphatically&mdash;&ldquo;and when you
      analyze every little emotion and instinct I just don&rsquo;t have &lsquo;em.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know.&rdquo; Amory admitted her point and shook his head helplessly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go.&rdquo; She stood up.
    </p>
    <p>
      He rose abstractedly and they walked to the foot of the stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What train can I get?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s one about 9:11 if you really must go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I&rsquo;ve got to go, really. Good night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They were at the head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he
      thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face. He
      lay awake in the darkness and wondered how much he cared&mdash;how much of
      his sudden unhappiness was hurt vanity&mdash;whether he was, after all,
      temperamentally unfitted for romance.
    </p>
    <p>
      When he awoke, it was with a glad flood of consciousness. The early wind
      stirred the chintz curtains at the windows and he was idly puzzled not to
      be in his room at Princeton with his school football picture over the
      bureau and the Triangle Club on the wall opposite. Then the grandfather&rsquo;s
      clock in the hall outside struck eight, and the memory of the night before
      came to him. He was out of bed, dressing, like the wind; he must get out
      of the house before he saw Isabelle. What had seemed a melancholy
      happening, now seemed a tiresome anticlimax. He was dressed at half past,
      so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were
      twisted somewhat more than he had thought. What an ironic mockery the
      morning seemed!&mdash;bright and sunny, and full of the smell of the
      garden; hearing Mrs. Borge&rsquo;s voice in the sun-parlor below, he wondered
      where was Isabelle.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a knock at the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The car will be around at ten minutes of nine, sir.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He returned to his contemplation of the outdoors, and began repeating over
      and over, mechanically, a verse from Browning, which he had once quoted to
      Isabelle in a letter:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Each life unfulfilled, you see,
      It hangs still, patchy and scrappy;
    We have not sighed deep, laughed free,
      Starved, feasted, despaired&mdash;been happy.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      But his life would not be unfulfilled. He took a sombre satisfaction in
      thinking that perhaps all along she had been nothing except what he had
      read into her; that this was her high point, that no one else would ever
      make her think. Yet that was what she had objected to in him; and Amory
      was suddenly tired of thinking, thinking!
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Damn her!&rdquo; he said bitterly, &ldquo;she&rsquo;s spoiled my year!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      THE SUPERMAN GROWS CARELESS
    </p>
    <p>
      On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the
      sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a
      stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a
      morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite
      boredom of conic sections. Mr. Rooney, pander to the dull, conducted the
      class and smoked innumerable Pall Malls as he drew diagrams and worked
      equations from six in the morning until midnight.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, Langueduc, if I used that formula, where would my A point be?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Langueduc lazily shifts his six-foot-three of football material and tries
      to concentrate.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh&mdash;ah&mdash;I&rsquo;m damned if I know, Mr. Rooney.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, why of course, of course you can&rsquo;t <i>use</i> that formula. <i>That&rsquo;s</i>
      what I wanted you to say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, sure, of course.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you see why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You bet&mdash;I suppose so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you don&rsquo;t see, tell me. I&rsquo;m here to show you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, Mr. Rooney, if you don&rsquo;t mind, I wish you&rsquo;d go over that again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gladly. Now here&rsquo;s &lsquo;A&rsquo;...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The room was a study in stupidity&mdash;two huge stands for paper, Mr.
      Rooney in his shirt-sleeves in front of them, and slouched around on
      chairs, a dozen men: Fred Sloane, the pitcher, who absolutely <i>had</i>
      to get eligible; &ldquo;Slim&rdquo; Langueduc, who would beat Yale this fall, if only
      he could master a poor fifty per cent; McDowell, gay young sophomore, who
      thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these
      prominent athletes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Those poor birds who haven&rsquo;t a cent to tutor, and have to study during
      the term are the ones I pity,&rdquo; he announced to Amory one day, with a
      flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips. &ldquo;I
      should think it would be such a bore, there&rsquo;s so much else to do in New
      York during the term. I suppose they don&rsquo;t know what they miss, anyhow.&rdquo;
       There was such an air of &ldquo;you and I&rdquo; about Mr. McDowell that Amory very
      nearly pushed him out of the open window when he said this. ... Next
      February his mother would wonder why he didn&rsquo;t make a club and increase
      his allowance... simple little nut....
    </p>
    <p>
      Through the smoke and the air of solemn, dense earnestness that filled the
      room would come the inevitable helpless cry:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t get it! Repeat that, Mr. Rooney!&rdquo; Most of them were so stupid or
      careless that they wouldn&rsquo;t admit when they didn&rsquo;t understand, and Amory
      was of the latter. He found it impossible to study conic sections;
      something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly
      through Mr. Rooney&rsquo;s fetid parlors distorted their equations into
      insoluble anagrams. He made a last night&rsquo;s effort with the proverbial wet
      towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the
      color and ambition of the spring before had faded out. Somehow, with the
      defection of Isabelle the idea of undergraduate success had loosed its
      grasp on his imagination, and he contemplated a possible failure to pass
      off his condition with equanimity, even though it would arbitrarily mean
      his removal from the Princetonian board and the slaughter of his chances
      for the Senior Council.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was always his luck.
    </p>
    <p>
      He yawned, scribbled his honor pledge on the cover, and sauntered from the
      room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you don&rsquo;t pass it,&rdquo; said the newly arrived Alec as they sat on the
      window-seat of Amory&rsquo;s room and mused upon a scheme of wall decoration,
      &ldquo;you&rsquo;re the world&rsquo;s worst goopher. Your stock will go down like an
      elevator at the club and on the campus.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, hell, I know it. Why rub it in?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Cause you deserve it. Anybody that&rsquo;d risk what you were in line for <i>ought</i>
      to be ineligible for Princetonian chairman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, drop the subject,&rdquo; Amory protested. &ldquo;Watch and wait and shut up. I
      don&rsquo;t want every one at the club asking me about it, as if I were a prize
      potato being fattened for a vegetable show.&rdquo; One evening a week later
      Amory stopped below his own window on the way to Renwick&rsquo;s, and, seeing a
      light, called up:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Tom, any mail?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Alec&rsquo;s head appeared against the yellow square of light.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, your result&rsquo;s here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His heart clamored violently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is it, blue or pink?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t know. Better come up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He walked into the room and straight over to the table, and then suddenly
      noticed that there were other people in the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Lo, Kerry.&rdquo; He was most polite. &ldquo;Ah, men of Princeton.&rdquo; They seemed to
      be mostly friends, so he picked up the envelope marked &ldquo;Registrar&rsquo;s
      Office,&rdquo; and weighed it nervously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We have here quite a slip of paper.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Open it, Amory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just to be dramatic, I&rsquo;ll let you know that if it&rsquo;s blue, my name is
      withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is
      over.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He paused, and then saw for the first time Ferrenby&rsquo;s eyes, wearing a
      hungry look and watching him eagerly. Amory returned the gaze pointedly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Watch my face, gentlemen, for the primitive emotions.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He tore it open and held the slip up to the light.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pink or blue?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Say what it is.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;re all ears, Amory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Smile or swear&mdash;or something.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a pause... a small crowd of seconds swept by... then he looked
      again and another crowd went on into time.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Blue as the sky, gentlemen....&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      AFTERMATH
    </p>
    <p>
      What Amory did that year from early September to late in the spring was so
      purposeless and inconsecutive that it seems scarcely worth recording. He
      was, of course, immediately sorry for what he had lost. His philosophy of
      success had tumbled down upon him, and he looked for the reasons.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your own laziness,&rdquo; said Alec later.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;something deeper than that. I&rsquo;ve begun to feel that I was meant
      to lose this chance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They&rsquo;re rather off you at the club, you know; every man that doesn&rsquo;t come
      through makes our crowd just so much weaker.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hate that point of view.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course, with a little effort you could still stage a comeback.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;I&rsquo;m through&mdash;as far as ever being a power in college is
      concerned.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, Amory, honestly, what makes me the angriest isn&rsquo;t the fact that you
      won&rsquo;t be chairman of the Prince and on the Senior Council, but just that
      you didn&rsquo;t get down and pass that exam.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not me,&rdquo; said Amory slowly; &ldquo;I&rsquo;m mad at the concrete thing. My own
      idleness was quite in accord with my system, but the luck broke.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your system broke, you mean.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Maybe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, what are you going to do? Get a better one quick, or just bum
      around for two more years as a has-been?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know yet...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Amory, buck up!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Maybe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory&rsquo;s point of view, though dangerous, was not far from the true one. If
      his reactions to his environment could be tabulated, the chart would have
      appeared like this, beginning with his earliest years:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 1. The fundamental Amory.

 2. Amory plus Beatrice.

 3. Amory plus Beatrice plus Minneapolis.
</pre>
    <p>
      Then St. Regis&rsquo; had pulled him to pieces and started him over again:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 4. Amory plus St. Regis&rsquo;.

 5. Amory plus St. Regis&rsquo; plus Princeton.
</pre>
    <p>
      That had been his nearest approach to success through conformity. The
      fundamental Amory, idle, imaginative, rebellious, had been nearly snowed
      under. He had conformed, he had succeeded, but as his imagination was
      neither satisfied nor grasped by his own success, he had listlessly,
      half-accidentally chucked the whole thing and become again:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 6. The fundamental Amory.

</pre>
    <hr />
    <p>
      FINANCIAL
    </p>
    <p>
      His father died quietly and inconspicuously at Thanksgiving. The
      incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his
      mother&rsquo;s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the
      funeral with an amused tolerance. He decided that burial was after all
      preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow
      oxidation in the top of a tree. The day after the ceremony he was amusing
      himself in the great library by sinking back on a couch in graceful
      mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day
      came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor
      Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or
      with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from
      things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr.
      Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place
      several days after the funeral. For the first time he came into actual
      cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had
      once been under his father&rsquo;s management. He took a ledger labelled &ldquo;1906&rdquo;
       and ran through it rather carefully. The total expenditure that year had
      come to something over one hundred and ten thousand dollars. Forty
      thousand of this had been Beatrice&rsquo;s own income, and there had been no
      attempt to account for it: it was all under the heading, &ldquo;Drafts, checks,
      and letters of credit forwarded to Beatrice Blaine.&rdquo; The dispersal of the
      rest was rather minutely itemized: the taxes and improvements on the Lake
      Geneva estate had come to almost nine thousand dollars; the general
      up-keep, including Beatrice&rsquo;s electric and a French car, bought that year,
      was over thirty-five thousand dollars. The rest was fully taken care of,
      and there were invariably items which failed to balance on the right side
      of the ledger.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the volume for 1912 Amory was shocked to discover the decrease in the
      number of bond holdings and the great drop in the income. In the case of
      Beatrice&rsquo;s money this was not so pronounced, but it was obvious that his
      father had devoted the previous year to several unfortunate gambles in
      oil. Very little of the oil had been burned, but Stephen Blaine had been
      rather badly singed. The next year and the next and the next showed
      similar decreases, and Beatrice had for the first time begun using her own
      money for keeping up the house. Yet her doctor&rsquo;s bill for 1913 had been
      over nine thousand dollars.
    </p>
    <p>
      About the exact state of things Mr. Barton was quite vague and confused.
      There had been recent investments, the outcome of which was for the
      present problematical, and he had an idea there were further speculations
      and exchanges concerning which he had not been consulted.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full
      situation. The entire residue of the Blaine and O&rsquo;Hara fortunes consisted
      of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars,
      invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings. In fact,
      Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and street-car
      bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;I am quite sure,&rdquo; she wrote to Amory, &ldquo;that if there is one
  thing we can be positive of, it is that people will not stay in
  one place.  This Ford person has certainly made the most of that
  idea.  So I am instructing Mr. Barton to specialize on such things
  as Northern Pacific and these Rapid Transit Companies, as they
  call the street-cars.  I shall never forgive myself for not buying
  Bethlehem Steel.  I&rsquo;ve heard the most fascinating stories.  You
  must go into finance, Amory.  I&rsquo;m sure you would revel in it.
  You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you
  go up&mdash;almost indefinitely.  I&rsquo;m sure if I were a man I&rsquo;d love the
  handling of money; it has become quite a senile passion with me.
  Before I get any farther I want to discuss something.  A Mrs. Bispam,
  an overcordial little lady whom I met at a tea the other day,
  told me that her son, he is at Yale, wrote her that all the
  boys there wore their summer underwear all during the winter,
  and also went about with their heads wet and in low shoes on the
  coldest days.  Now, Amory, I don&rsquo;t know whether that is a fad at
  Princeton too, but I don&rsquo;t want you to be so foolish.  It not only
  inclines a young man to pneumonia and infantile paralysis, but to
  all forms of lung trouble, to which you are particularly
  inclined.  You cannot experiment with your health.  I have found
  that out.  I will not make myself ridiculous as some mothers no
  doubt do, by insisting that you wear overshoes, though I remember
  one Christmas you wore them around constantly without a single
  buckle latched, making such a curious swishing sound, and you
  refused to buckle them because it was not the thing to do.  The
  very next Christmas you would not wear even rubbers, though I
  begged you.  You are nearly twenty years old now, dear, and I
  can&rsquo;t be with you constantly to find whether you are doing the
  sensible thing.

  &ldquo;This has been a very <i>practical</i> letter.  I warned you in my last
  that the lack of money to do the things one wants to makes one
  quite prosy and domestic, but there is still plenty for
  everything if we are not too extravagant.  Take care of yourself,
  my dear boy, and do try to write at least <i>once</i> a week, because I
  imagine all sorts of horrible things if I don&rsquo;t hear from you.
          Affectionately,            MOTHER.&rdquo;
 
</pre>
    <hr />
    <p>
      FIRST APPEARANCE OF THE TERM &ldquo;PERSONAGE&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a
      week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open
      fire. Monsignor was growing a trifle stouter and his personality had
      expanded even with that, and Amory felt both rest and security in sinking
      into a squat, cushioned chair and joining him in the middle-aged sanity of
      a cigar.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve felt like leaving college, Monsignor.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All my career&rsquo;s gone up in smoke; you think it&rsquo;s petty and all that, but&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not at all petty. I think it&rsquo;s most important. I want to hear the whole
      thing. Everything you&rsquo;ve been doing since I saw you last.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory talked; he went thoroughly into the destruction of his egotistic
      highways, and in a half-hour the listless quality had left his voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What would you do if you left college?&rdquo; asked Monsignor.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t know. I&rsquo;d like to travel, but of course this tiresome war prevents
      that. Anyways, mother would hate not having me graduate. I&rsquo;m just at sea.
      Kerry Holiday wants me to go over with him and join the Lafayette
      Esquadrille.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know you wouldn&rsquo;t like to go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sometimes I would&mdash;to-night I&rsquo;d go in a second.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, you&rsquo;d have to be very much more tired of life than I think you are.
      I know you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid you do,&rdquo; agreed Amory reluctantly. &ldquo;It just seemed an easy way
      out of everything&mdash;when I think of another useless, draggy year.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I know; but to tell you the truth, I&rsquo;m not worried about you; you
      seem to me to be progressing perfectly naturally.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; Amory objected. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve lost half my personality in a year.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a bit of it!&rdquo; scoffed Monsignor. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve lost a great amount of
      vanity and that&rsquo;s all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lordy! I feel, anyway, as if I&rsquo;d gone through another fifth form at St.
      Regis&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No.&rdquo; Monsignor shook his head. &ldquo;That was a misfortune; this has been a
      good thing. Whatever worth while comes to you, won&rsquo;t be through the
      channels you were searching last year.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What could be more unprofitable than my present lack of pep?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps in itself... but you&rsquo;re developing. This has given you time to
      think and you&rsquo;re casting off a lot of your old luggage about success and
      the superman and all. People like us can&rsquo;t adopt whole theories, as you
      did. If we can do the next thing, and have an hour a day to think in, we
      can accomplish marvels, but as far as any high-handed scheme of blind
      dominance is concerned&mdash;we&rsquo;d just make asses of ourselves.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, Monsignor, I can&rsquo;t do the next thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory, between you and me, I have only just learned to do it myself. I
      can do the one hundred things beyond the next thing, but I stub my toe on
      that, just as you stubbed your toe on mathematics this fall.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why do we have to do the next thing? It never seems the sort of thing I
      should do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We have to do it because we&rsquo;re not personalities, but personages.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s a good line&mdash;what do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A personality is what you thought you were, what this Kerry and Sloane
      you tell me of evidently are. Personality is a physical matter almost
      entirely; it lowers the people it acts on&mdash;I&rsquo;ve seen it vanish in a
      long sickness. But while a personality is active, it overrides &lsquo;the next
      thing.&rsquo; Now a personage, on the other hand, gathers. He is never thought
      of apart from what he&rsquo;s done. He&rsquo;s a bar on which a thousand things have
      been hung&mdash;glittering things sometimes, as ours are; but he uses
      those things with a cold mentality back of them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And several of my most glittering possessions had fallen off when I
      needed them.&rdquo; Amory continued the simile eagerly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, that&rsquo;s it; when you feel that your garnered prestige and talents and
      all that are hung out, you need never bother about anybody; you can cope
      with them without difficulty.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, on the other hand, if I haven&rsquo;t my possessions, I&rsquo;m helpless!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Absolutely.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s certainly an idea.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now you&rsquo;ve a clean start&mdash;a start Kerry or Sloane can
      constitutionally never have. You brushed three or four ornaments down,
      and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them. The thing now is to
      collect some new ones, and the farther you look ahead in the collecting
      the better. But remember, do the next thing!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How clear you can make things!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      So they talked, often about themselves, sometimes of philosophy and
      religion, and life as respectively a game or a mystery. The priest seemed
      to guess Amory&rsquo;s thoughts before they were clear in his own head, so
      closely related were their minds in form and groove.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why do I make lists?&rdquo; Amory asked him one night. &ldquo;Lists of all sorts of
      things?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because you&rsquo;re a mediaevalist,&rdquo; Monsignor answered. &ldquo;We both are. It&rsquo;s
      the passion for classifying and finding a type.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a desire to get something definite.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the nucleus of scholastic philosophy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was beginning to think I was growing eccentric till I came up here. It
      was a pose, I guess.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t worry about that; for you not posing may be the biggest pose of
      all. Pose&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But do the next thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      After Amory returned to college he received several letters from Monsignor
      which gave him more egotistic food for consumption.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  I am afraid that I gave you too much assurance of your inevitable
  safety, and you must remember that I did that through faith in
  your springs of effort; not in the silly conviction that you will
  arrive without struggle.  Some nuances of character you will have
  to take for granted in yourself, though you must be careful in
  confessing them to others.  You are unsentimental, almost incapable
  of affection, astute without being cunning and vain without being
  proud.

  Don&rsquo;t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will
  really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself;
  and don&rsquo;t worry about losing your &ldquo;personality,&rdquo; as you persist
  in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning,
  at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of
  the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do,
  the genial golden warmth of 4 P.M.

  If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones.  Your
  last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful&mdash;
  so &ldquo;highbrow&rdquo; that I picture you living in an intellectual and
  emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too
  definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth
  they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and
  by pasting a supercilious label on every one you meet you are
  merely packing a Jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at
  you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with
  the world.  An idealization of some such a man as Leonardo da
  Vinci would be a more valuable beacon to you at present.

  You are bound to go up and down, just as I did in my youth, but
  do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to
  criticise don&rsquo;t blame yourself too much.

  You say that convention is all that really keeps you straight in
  this &ldquo;woman proposition&rdquo;; but it&rsquo;s more than that, Amory; it&rsquo;s
  the fear that what you begin you can&rsquo;t stop; you would run amuck,
  and I know whereof I speak; it&rsquo;s that half-miraculous sixth sense
  by which you detect evil, it&rsquo;s the half-realized fear of God in
  your heart.

  Whatever your metier proves to be&mdash;religion, architecture,
  literature&mdash;I&rsquo;m sure you would be much safer anchored to the
  Church, but I won&rsquo;t risk my influence by arguing with you even
  though I am secretly sure that the &ldquo;black chasm of Romanism&rdquo;
   yawns beneath you.  Do write me soon.

    With affectionate regards,          THAYER DARCY.
</pre>
    <p>
      Even Amory&rsquo;s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the
      misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile
      Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and
      Suetonius. One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private
      libraries of his classmates and found Sloane&rsquo;s as typical as any: sets of
      Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; &ldquo;What Every
      Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know,&rdquo; &ldquo;The Spell of the Yukon&rdquo;; a &ldquo;gift&rdquo; copy
      of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks,
      and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the
      collected poems of Rupert Brooke.
    </p>
    <p>
      Together with Tom D&rsquo;Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton
      for some one who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition.
    </p>
    <p>
      The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than
      had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before. Things had
      livened surprisingly, though at the sacrifice of much of the spontaneous
      charm of freshman year. In the old Princeton they would never have
      discovered Tanaduke Wylie. Tanaduke was a sophomore, with tremendous ears
      and a way of saying, &ldquo;The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of
      preconsidered generations!&rdquo; that made them vaguely wonder why it did not
      sound quite clear, but never question that it was the utterance of a
      supersoul. At least so Tom and Amory took him. They told him in all
      earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley&rsquo;s, and featured his ultrafree
      free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But
      Tanaduke&rsquo;s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the
      Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich
      Village now instead of &ldquo;noon-swirled moons,&rdquo; and met winter muses,
      unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of
      the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant
      appreciation. So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that
      he and his flaming ties would do better there. Tom gave him the final
      advice that he should stop writing for two years and read the complete
      works of Alexander Pope four times, but on Amory&rsquo;s suggestion that Pope
      for Tanaduke was like foot-ease for stomach trouble, they withdrew in
      laughter, and called it a coin&rsquo;s toss whether this genius was too big or
      too petty for them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy
      epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night.
      He was disappointed, too, at the air of general uncertainty on every
      subject that seemed linked with the pedantic temperament; his opinions
      took shape in a miniature satire called &ldquo;In a Lecture-Room,&rdquo; which he
      persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Good-morning, Fool...
                       Three times a week
    You hold us helpless while you speak,
    Teasing our thirsty souls with the
    Sleek &lsquo;yeas&rsquo; of your philosophy...
    Well, here we are, your hundred sheep,
    Tune up, play on, pour forth... we sleep...
    You are a student, so they say;
    You hammered out the other day
    A syllabus, from what we know
    Of some forgotten folio;
    You&rsquo;d sniffled through an era&rsquo;s must,
    Filling your nostrils up with dust,
    And then, arising from your knees,
    Published, in one gigantic sneeze...
    But here&rsquo;s a neighbor on my right,
    An Eager Ass, considered bright;
    Asker of questions....  How he&rsquo;ll stand,
    With earnest air and fidgy hand,
    After this hour, telling you
    He sat all night and burrowed through
    Your book....  Oh, you&rsquo;ll be coy and he
    Will simulate precosity,
    And pedants both, you&rsquo;ll smile and smirk,
    And leer, and hasten back to work....

    &lsquo;Twas this day week, sir, you returned
    A theme of mine, from which I learned
    (Through various comment on the side
    Which you had scrawled) that I defied
    The <i>highest rules of criticism</i>
    For <i>cheap</i> and <i>careless</i> witticism....
      &lsquo;Are you quite sure that this could be?&rsquo; 
    And
      &lsquo;Shaw is no authority!&rsquo; 
    But Eager Ass, with what he&rsquo;s sent,
    Plays havoc with your best per cent.

    Still&mdash;still I meet you here and there...
    When Shakespeare&rsquo;s played you hold a chair,
    And some defunct, moth-eaten star
    Enchants the mental prig you are...
    A radical comes down and shocks
    The atheistic orthodox?
    You&rsquo;re representing Common Sense,
    Mouth open, in the audience.
    And, sometimes, even chapel lures
    That conscious tolerance of yours,
    That broad and beaming view of truth
    (Including Kant and General Booth...)
    And so from shock to shock you live,
    A hollow, pale affirmative...

    The hour&rsquo;s up... and roused from rest
    One hundred children of the blest
    Cheat you a word or two with feet
    That down the noisy aisle-ways beat...
    Forget on <i>narrow-minded earth</i>
    The Mighty Yawn that gave you birth.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      In April, Kerry Holiday left college and sailed for France to enroll in
      the Lafayette Esquadrille. Amory&rsquo;s envy and admiration of this step was
      drowned in an experience of his own to which he never succeeded in giving
      an appropriate value, but which, nevertheless, haunted him for three years
      afterward.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      THE DEVIL
    </p>
    <p>
      Healy&rsquo;s they left at twelve and taxied to Bistolary&rsquo;s. There were Axia
      Marlowe and Phoebe Column, from the Summer Garden show, Fred Sloane and
      Amory. The evening was so very young that they felt ridiculous with
      surplus energy, and burst into the cafe like Dionysian revellers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Table for four in the middle of the floor,&rdquo; yelled Phoebe. &ldquo;Hurry, old
      dear, tell &lsquo;em we&rsquo;re here!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell &lsquo;em to play &lsquo;Admiration&rsquo;!&rdquo; shouted Sloane. &ldquo;You two order; Phoebe
      and I are going to shake a wicked calf,&rdquo; and they sailed off in the
      muddled crowd. Axia and Amory, acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a
      waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and
      watched.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s Findle Margotson, from New Haven!&rdquo; she cried above the uproar.
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Lo, Findle! Whoo-ee!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Axia!&rdquo; he shouted in salutation. &ldquo;C&rsquo;mon over to our table.&rdquo; &ldquo;No!&rdquo;
       Amory whispered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Can&rsquo;t do it, Findle; I&rsquo;m with somebody else! Call me up to-morrow about
      one o&rsquo;clock!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Findle, a nondescript man-about-Bisty&rsquo;s, answered incoherently and turned
      back to the brilliant blonde whom he was endeavoring to steer around the
      room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a natural damn fool,&rdquo; commented Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, he&rsquo;s all right. Here&rsquo;s the old jitney waiter. If you ask me, I want a
      double Daiquiri.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Make it four.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The crowd whirled and changed and shifted. They were mostly from the
      colleges, with a scattering of the male refuse of Broadway, and women of
      two types, the higher of which was the chorus girl. On the whole it was a
      typical crowd, and their party as typical as any. About three-fourths of
      the whole business was for effect and therefore harmless, ended at the
      door of the cafe, soon enough for the five-o&rsquo;clock train back to Yale or
      Princeton; about one-fourth continued on into the dimmer hours and
      gathered strange dust from strange places. Their party was scheduled to be
      one of the harmless kind. Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends;
      Axia and Amory new ones. But strange things are prepared even in the dead
      of night, and the unusual, which lurks least in the cafe, home of the
      prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance
      of Broadway. The way it took was so inexpressibly terrible, so
      unbelievable, that afterward he never thought of it as experience; but it
      was a scene from a misty tragedy, played far behind the veil, and that it
      meant something definite he knew.
    </p>
    <p>
      About one o&rsquo;clock they moved to Maxim&rsquo;s, and two found them in
      Deviniere&rsquo;s. Sloane had been drinking consecutively and was in a state of
      unsteady exhilaration, but Amory was quite tiresomely sober; they had run
      across none of those ancient, corrupt buyers of champagne who usually
      assisted their New York parties. They were just through dancing and were
      making their way back to their chairs when Amory became aware that some
      one at a near-by table was looking at him. He turned and glanced
      casually... a middle-aged man dressed in a brown sack suit, it was,
      sitting a little apart at a table by himself and watching their party
      intently. At Amory&rsquo;s glance he smiled faintly. Amory turned to Fred, who
      was just sitting down.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who&rsquo;s that pale fool watching us?&rdquo; he complained indignantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where?&rdquo; cried Sloane. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll have him thrown out!&rdquo; He rose to his feet
      and swayed back and forth, clinging to his chair. &ldquo;Where is he?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Axia and Phoebe suddenly leaned and whispered to each other across the
      table, and before Amory realized it they found themselves on their way to
      the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where now?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Up to the flat,&rdquo; suggested Phoebe. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve got brandy and fizz&mdash;and
      everything&rsquo;s slow down here to-night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory considered quickly. He hadn&rsquo;t been drinking, and decided that if he
      took no more, it would be reasonably discreet for him to trot along in the
      party. In fact, it would be, perhaps, the thing to do in order to keep an
      eye on Sloane, who was not in a state to do his own thinking. So he took
      Axia&rsquo;s arm and, piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the
      hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house. ... Never
      would he forget that street.... It was a broad street, lined on both sides
      with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they
      stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright
      moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor. He imagined each one to have an
      elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight
      stories high and full of three and four room suites. He was rather glad to
      walk into the cheeriness of Phoebe&rsquo;s living-room and sink onto a sofa,
      while the girls went rummaging for food.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Phoebe&rsquo;s great stuff,&rdquo; confided Sloane, sotto voce.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m only going to stay half an hour,&rdquo; Amory said sternly. He wondered if
      it sounded priggish.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hell y&rsquo; say,&rdquo; protested Sloane. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re here now&mdash;don&rsquo;t le&rsquo;s rush.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t like this place,&rdquo; Amory said sulkily, &ldquo;and I don&rsquo;t want any
      food.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Phoebe reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four
      glasses.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory, pour &lsquo;em out,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;and we&rsquo;ll drink to Fred Sloane, who has
      a rare, distinguished edge.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Axia, coming in, &ldquo;and Amory. I like Amory.&rdquo; She sat down
      beside him and laid her yellow head on his shoulder.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll pour,&rdquo; said Sloane; &ldquo;you use siphon, Phoebe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They filled the tray with glasses.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ready, here she goes!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory hesitated, glass in hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a minute while temptation crept over him like a warm wind, and
      his imagination turned to fire, and he took the glass from Phoebe&rsquo;s hand.
      That was all; for at the second that his decision came, he looked up and
      saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the cafe, and with his
      jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand. There the man
      half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan. His
      face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the cafe, neither the dull,
      pasty color of a dead man&mdash;rather a sort of virile pallor&mdash;nor
      unhealthy, you&rsquo;d have called it; but like a strong man who&rsquo;d worked in a
      mine or done night shifts in a damp climate. Amory looked him over
      carefully and later he could have drawn him after a fashion, down to the
      merest details. His mouth was the kind that is called frank, and he had
      steady gray eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group,
      with just the shade of a questioning expression. Amory noticed his hands;
      they weren&rsquo;t fine at all, but they had versatility and a tenuous
      strength... they were nervous hands that sat lightly along the cushions
      and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings. Then,
      suddenly, Amory perceived the feet, and with a rush of blood to the head
      he realized he was afraid. The feet were all wrong ... with a sort of
      wrongness that he felt rather than knew.... It was like weakness in a good
      woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake
      little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a
      sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the
      fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a
      darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end.... They were
      unutterably terrible....
    </p>
    <p>
      He must have said something, or looked something, for Axia&rsquo;s voice came
      out of the void with a strange goodness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, look at Amory! Poor old Amory&rsquo;s sick&mdash;old head going &lsquo;round?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look at that man!&rdquo; cried Amory, pointing toward the corner divan.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You mean that purple zebra!&rdquo; shrieked Axia facetiously. &ldquo;Ooo-ee! Amory&rsquo;s
      got a purple zebra watching him!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Sloane laughed vacantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ole zebra gotcha, Amory?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a silence.... The man regarded Amory quizzically.... Then the
      human voices fell faintly on his ear:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thought you weren&rsquo;t drinking,&rdquo; remarked Axia sardonically, but her voice
      was good to hear; the whole divan that held the man was alive; alive like
      heat waves over asphalt, like wriggling worms....
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come back! Come back!&rdquo; Axia&rsquo;s arm fell on his. &ldquo;Amory, dear, you aren&rsquo;t
      going, Amory!&rdquo; He was half-way to the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on, Amory, stick &lsquo;th us!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sick, are you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sit down a second!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take some water.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take a little brandy....&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The elevator was close, and the colored boy was half asleep, paled to a
      livid bronze... Axia&rsquo;s beseeching voice floated down the shaft. Those
      feet... those feet...
    </p>
    <p>
      As they settled to the lower floor the feet came into view in the sickly
      electric light of the paved hall.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      IN THE ALLEY
    </p>
    <p>
      Down the long street came the moon, and Amory turned his back on it and
      walked. Ten, fifteen steps away sounded the footsteps. They were like a
      slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall. Amory&rsquo;s
      shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably
      that far behind. With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the
      blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard
      seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings. After that
      he stopped suddenly; he must keep hold, he thought. His lips were dry and
      he licked them.
    </p>
    <p>
      If he met any one good&mdash;were there any good people left in the world
      or did they all live in white apartment-houses now? Was every one followed
      in the moonlight? But if he met some one good who&rsquo;d know what he meant and
      hear this damned scuffle... then the scuffling grew suddenly nearer, and a
      black cloud settled over the moon. When again the pale sheen skimmed the
      cornices, it was almost beside him, and Amory thought he heard a quiet
      breathing. Suddenly he realized that the footsteps were not behind, had
      never been behind, they were ahead and he was not eluding but following...
      following. He began to run, blindly, his heart knocking heavily, his hands
      clinched. Far ahead a black dot showed itself, resolved slowly into a
      human shape. But Amory was beyond that now; he turned off the street and
      darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness. He
      twisted down a long, sinuous blackness, where the moonlight was shut away
      except for tiny glints and patches... then suddenly sank panting into a
      corner by a fence, exhausted. The steps ahead stopped, and he could hear
      them shift slightly with a continuous motion, like waves around a dock.
    </p>
    <p>
      He put his face in his hands and covered eyes and ears as well as he
      could. During all this time it never occurred to him that he was delirious
      or drunk. He had a sense of reality such as material things could never
      give him. His intellectual content seemed to submit passively to it, and
      it fitted like a glove everything that had ever preceded it in his life.
      It did not muddle him. It was like a problem whose answer he knew on
      paper, yet whose solution he was unable to grasp. He was far beyond
      horror. He had sunk through the thin surface of that, now moved in a
      region where the feet and the fear of white walls were real, living
      things, things he must accept. Only far inside his soul a little fire
      leaped and cried that something was pulling him down, trying to get him
      inside a door and slam it behind him. After that door was slammed there
      would be only footfalls and white buildings in the moonlight, and perhaps
      he would be one of the footfalls.
    </p>
    <p>
      During the five or ten minutes he waited in the shadow of the fence, there
      was somehow this fire... that was as near as he could name it afterward.
      He remembered calling aloud:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want some one stupid. Oh, send some one stupid!&rdquo; This to the black
      fence opposite him, in whose shadows the footsteps shuffled ... shuffled.
      He supposed &ldquo;stupid&rdquo; and &ldquo;good&rdquo; had become somehow intermingled through
      previous association. When he called thus it was not an act of will at all&mdash;will
      had turned him away from the moving figure in the street; it was almost
      instinct that called, just the pile on pile of inherent tradition or some
      wild prayer from way over the night. Then something clanged like a low
      gong struck at a distance, and before his eyes a face flashed over the two
      feet, a face pale and distorted with a sort of infinite evil that twisted
      it like flame in the wind; <i>but he knew, for the half instant that the
      gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird.</i>
    </p>
    <p>
      Minutes later he sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no
      more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley. It was cold, and
      he started on a steady run for the light that showed the street at the
      other end.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      AT THE WINDOW
    </p>
    <p>
      It was late morning when he woke and found the telephone beside his bed in
      the hotel tolling frantically, and remembered that he had left word to be
      called at eleven. Sloane was snoring heavily, his clothes in a pile by his
      bed. They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to
      get some air. Amory&rsquo;s mind was working slowly, trying to assimilate what
      had happened and separate from the chaotic imagery that stacked his memory
      the bare shreds of truth. If the morning had been cold and gray he could
      have grasped the reins of the past in an instant, but it was one of those
      days that New York gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is
      a soft, light wine. How much or how little Sloane remembered Amory did not
      care to know; he apparently had none of the nervous tension that was
      gripping Amory and forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then Broadway broke upon them, and with the babel of noise and the painted
      faces a sudden sickness rushed over Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For God&rsquo;s sake, let&rsquo;s go back! Let&rsquo;s get off of this&mdash;this place!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Sloane looked at him in amazement.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This street, it&rsquo;s ghastly! Come on! let&rsquo;s get back to the Avenue!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you mean to say,&rdquo; said Sloane stolidly, &ldquo;that &lsquo;cause you had some sort
      of indigestion that made you act like a maniac last night, you&rsquo;re never
      coming on Broadway again?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Simultaneously Amory classed him with the crowd, and he seemed no longer
      Sloane of the debonair humor and the happy personality, but only one of
      the evil faces that whirled along the turbid stream.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Man!&rdquo; he shouted so loud that the people on the corner turned and
      followed them with their eyes, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s filthy, and if you can&rsquo;t see it,
      you&rsquo;re filthy, too!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t help it,&rdquo; said Sloane doggedly. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s the matter with you? Old
      remorse getting you? You&rsquo;d be in a fine state if you&rsquo;d gone through with
      our little party.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m going, Fred,&rdquo; said Amory slowly. His knees were shaking under him,
      and he knew that if he stayed another minute on this street he would keel
      over where he stood. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be at the Vanderbilt for lunch.&rdquo; And he strode
      rapidly off and turned over to Fifth Avenue. Back at the hotel he felt
      better, but as he walked into the barber-shop, intending to get a head
      massage, the smell of the powders and tonics brought back Axia&rsquo;s sidelong,
      suggestive smile, and he left hurriedly. In the doorway of his room a
      sudden blackness flowed around him like a divided river.
    </p>
    <p>
      When he came to himself he knew that several hours had passed. He pitched
      onto the bed and rolled over on his face with a deadly fear that he was
      going mad. He wanted people, people, some one sane and stupid and good. He
      lay for he knew not how long without moving. He could feel the little hot
      veins on his forehead standing out, and his terror had hardened on him
      like plaster. He felt he was passing up again through the thin crust of
      horror, and now only could he distinguish the shadowy twilight he was
      leaving. He must have fallen asleep again, for when he next recollected
      himself he had paid the hotel bill and was stepping into a taxi at the
      door. It was raining torrents.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the train for Princeton he saw no one he knew, only a crowd of
      fagged-looking Philadelphians. The presence of a painted woman across the
      aisle filled him with a fresh burst of sickness and he changed to another
      car, tried to concentrate on an article in a popular magazine. He found
      himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this
      attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp
      window-pane. The car, a smoker, was hot and stuffy with most of the smells
      of the state&rsquo;s alien population; he opened a window and shivered against
      the cloud of fog that drifted in over him. The two hours&rsquo; ride were like
      days, and he nearly cried aloud with joy when the towers of Princeton
      loomed up beside him and the yellow squares of light filtered through the
      blue rain.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tom was standing in the centre of the room, pensively relighting a
      cigar-stub. Amory fancied he looked rather relieved on seeing him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Had a hell of a dream about you last night,&rdquo; came in the cracked voice
      through the cigar smoke. &ldquo;I had an idea you were in some trouble.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t tell me about it!&rdquo; Amory almost shrieked. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t say a word; I&rsquo;m
      tired and pepped out.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom looked at him queerly and then sank into a chair and opened his
      Italian note-book. Amory threw his coat and hat on the floor, loosened his
      collar, and took a Wells novel at random from the shelf. &ldquo;Wells is sane,&rdquo;
       he thought, &ldquo;and if he won&rsquo;t do I&rsquo;ll read Rupert Brooke.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Half an hour passed. Outside the wind came up, and Amory started as the
      wet branches moved and clawed with their finger-nails at the window-pane.
      Tom was deep in his work, and inside the room only the occasional scratch
      of a match or the rustle of leather as they shifted in their chairs broke
      the stillness. Then like a zigzag of lightning came the change. Amory sat
      bolt upright, frozen cold in his chair. Tom was looking at him with his
      mouth drooping, eyes fixed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;God help us!&rdquo; Amory cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, my heavens!&rdquo; shouted Tom, &ldquo;look behind!&rdquo; Quick as a flash Amory
      whirled around. He saw nothing but the dark window-pane. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s gone now,&rdquo;
       came Tom&rsquo;s voice after a second in a still terror. &ldquo;Something was looking
      at you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Trembling violently, Amory dropped into his chair again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve got to tell you,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve had one hell of an experience. I
      think I&rsquo;ve&mdash;I&rsquo;ve seen the devil or&mdash;something like him. What
      face did you just see?&mdash;or no,&rdquo; he added quickly, &ldquo;don&rsquo;t tell me!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And he gave Tom the story. It was midnight when he finished, and after
      that, with all lights burning, two sleepy, shivering boys read to each
      other from &ldquo;The New Machiavelli,&rdquo; until dawn came up out of Witherspoon
      Hall, and the Princetonian fell against the door, and the May birds hailed
      the sun on last night&rsquo;s rain.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0004" id="link2HCH0004">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 4. Narcissus Off Duty
    </h2>
    <p>
      During Princeton&rsquo;s transition period, that is, during Amory&rsquo;s last two
      years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic
      beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who
      stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and
      wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the
      beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that
      they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless
      others before him had questioned so long in secret. First, and partly by
      accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical
      novel that Amory christened &ldquo;quest&rdquo; books. In the &ldquo;quest&rdquo; book the hero
      set off in life armed with the best weapons and avowedly intending to use
      them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as
      selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the &ldquo;quest&rdquo; books
      discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them. &ldquo;None
      Other Gods,&rdquo; &ldquo;Sinister Street,&rdquo; and &ldquo;The Research Magnificent&rdquo; were
      examples of such books; it was the latter of these three that gripped
      Burne Holiday and made him wonder in the beginning of senior year how much
      it was worth while being a diplomatic autocrat around his club on Prospect
      Avenue and basking in the high lights of class office. It was distinctly
      through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way. Amory,
      through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not
      until January of senior year did their friendship commence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Heard the latest?&rdquo; said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that
      triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. Somebody flunked out? Or another ship sunk?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Worse than that. About one-third of the junior class are going to resign
      from their clubs.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Actual fact!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Spirit of reform and all that. Burne Holiday is behind it. The club
      presidents are holding a meeting to-night to see if they can find a joint
      means of combating it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, what&rsquo;s the idea of the thing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, clubs injurious to Princeton democracy; cost a lot; draw social
      lines, take time; the regular line you get sometimes from disappointed
      sophomores. Woodrow thought they should be abolished and all that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But this is the real thing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Absolutely. I think it&rsquo;ll go through.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For Pete&rsquo;s sake, tell me more about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; began Tom, &ldquo;it seems that the idea developed simultaneously in
      several heads. I was talking to Burne awhile ago, and he claims that it&rsquo;s
      a logical result if an intelligent person thinks long enough about the
      social system. They had a &lsquo;discussion crowd&rsquo; and the point of abolishing
      the clubs was brought up by some one&mdash;everybody there leaped at it&mdash;it
      had been in each one&rsquo;s mind, more or less, and it just needed a spark to
      bring it out.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fine! I swear I think it&rsquo;ll be most entertaining. How do they feel up at
      Cap and Gown?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wild, of course. Every one&rsquo;s been sitting and arguing and swearing and
      getting mad and getting sentimental and getting brutal. It&rsquo;s the same at
      all the clubs; I&rsquo;ve been the rounds. They get one of the radicals in the
      corner and fire questions at him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do the radicals stand up?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, moderately well. Burne&rsquo;s a damn good talker, and so obviously sincere
      that you can&rsquo;t get anywhere with him. It&rsquo;s so evident that resigning from
      his club means so much more to him than preventing it does to us that I
      felt futile when I argued; finally took a position that was brilliantly
      neutral. In fact, I believe Burne thought for a while that he&rsquo;d converted
      me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you say almost a third of the junior class are going to resign?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Call it a fourth and be safe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lord&mdash;who&rsquo;d have thought it possible!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a brisk knock at the door, and Burne himself came in. &ldquo;Hello,
      Amory&mdash;hello, Tom.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory rose.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Evening, Burne. Don&rsquo;t mind if I seem to rush; I&rsquo;m going to Renwick&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Burne turned to him quickly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You probably know what I want to talk to Tom about, and it isn&rsquo;t a bit
      private. I wish you&rsquo;d stay.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;d be glad to.&rdquo; Amory sat down again, and as Burne perched on a table
      and launched into argument with Tom, he looked at this revolutionary more
      carefully than he ever had before. Broad-browed and strong-chinned, with a
      fineness in the honest gray eyes that were like Kerry&rsquo;s, Burne was a man
      who gave an immediate impression of bigness and security&mdash;stubborn,
      that was evident, but his stubbornness wore no stolidity, and when he had
      talked for five minutes Amory knew that this keen enthusiasm had in it no
      quality of dilettantism.
    </p>
    <p>
      The intense power Amory felt later in Burne Holiday differed from the
      admiration he had had for Humbird. This time it began as purely a mental
      interest. With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class,
      he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed
      that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance. But that
      night Amory was struck by Burne&rsquo;s intense earnestness, a quality he was
      accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great
      enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart. Burne stood vaguely for a
      land Amory hoped he was drifting toward&mdash;and it was almost time that
      land was in sight. Tom and Amory and Alec had reached an impasse; never
      did they seem to have new experiences in common, for Tom and Alec had been
      as blindly busy with their committees and boards as Amory had been blindly
      idling, and the things they had for dissection&mdash;college, contemporary
      personality and the like&mdash;they had hashed and rehashed for many a
      frugal conversational meal.
    </p>
    <p>
      That night they discussed the clubs until twelve, and, in the main, they
      agreed with Burne. To the roommates it did not seem such a vital subject
      as it had in the two years before, but the logic of Burne&rsquo;s objections to
      the social system dovetailed so completely with everything they had
      thought, that they questioned rather than argued, and envied the sanity
      that enabled this man to stand out so against all traditions.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then Amory branched off and found that Burne was deep in other things as
      well. Economics had interested him and he was turning socialist. Pacifism
      played in the back of his mind, and he read The Masses and Lyoff Tolstoi
      faithfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How about religion?&rdquo; Amory asked him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t know. I&rsquo;m in a muddle about a lot of things&mdash;I&rsquo;ve just
      discovered that I&rsquo;ve a mind, and I&rsquo;m starting to read.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Read what?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Everything. I have to pick and choose, of course, but mostly things to
      make me think. I&rsquo;m reading the four gospels now, and the &lsquo;Varieties of
      Religious Experience.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What chiefly started you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wells, I guess, and Tolstoi, and a man named Edward Carpenter. I&rsquo;ve been
      reading for over a year now&mdash;on a few lines, on what I consider the
      essential lines.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poetry?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, frankly, not what you call poetry, or for your reasons&mdash;you
      two write, of course, and look at things differently. Whitman is the man
      that attracts me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Whitman?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; he&rsquo;s a definite ethical force.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I&rsquo;m ashamed to say that I&rsquo;m a blank on the subject of Whitman. How
      about you, Tom?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom nodded sheepishly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; continued Burne, &ldquo;you may strike a few poems that are tiresome,
      but I mean the mass of his work. He&rsquo;s tremendous&mdash;like Tolstoi. They
      both look things in the face, and, somehow, different as they are, stand
      for somewhat the same things.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have me stumped, Burne,&rdquo; Amory admitted. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve read &lsquo;Anna Karenina&rsquo; 
      and the &lsquo;Kreutzer Sonata&rsquo; of course, but Tolstoi is mostly in the original
      Russian as far as I&rsquo;m concerned.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s the greatest man in hundreds of years,&rdquo; cried Burne
      enthusiastically. &ldquo;Did you ever see a picture of that shaggy old head of
      his?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They talked until three, from biology to organized religion, and when
      Amory crept shivering into bed it was with his mind aglow with ideas and a
      sense of shock that some one else had discovered the path he might have
      followed. Burne Holiday was so evidently developing&mdash;and Amory had
      considered that he was doing the same. He had fallen into a deep cynicism
      over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and
      read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of
      decadence&mdash;now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and
      a half seemed stale and futile&mdash;a petty consummation of himself...
      and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that
      filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.
      He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he
      had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was
      Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as
      Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with
      his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals&mdash;a Catholicism which
      Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or
      sacrifice.
    </p>
    <p>
      He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the
      &ldquo;Kreutzer Sonata,&rdquo; searched it carefully for the germs of Burne&rsquo;s
      enthusiasm. Being Burne was suddenly so much realler than being clever.
      Yet he sighed... here were other possible clay feet.
    </p>
    <p>
      He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous
      freshman, quite submerged in his brother&rsquo;s personality. Then he remembered
      an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the
      leading role.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dean Hollister had been heard by a large group arguing with a taxi-driver,
      who had driven him from the junction. In the course of the altercation the
      dean remarked that he &ldquo;might as well buy the taxicab.&rdquo; He paid and walked
      off, but next morning he entered his private office to find the taxicab
      itself in the space usually occupied by his desk, bearing a sign which
      read &ldquo;Property of Dean Hollister. Bought and Paid for.&rdquo;... It took two
      expert mechanics half a day to dissemble it into its minutest parts and
      remove it, which only goes to prove the rare energy of sophomore humor
      under efficient leadership.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then again, that very fall, Burne had caused a sensation. A certain
      Phyllis Styles, an intercollegiate prom-trotter, had failed to get her
      yearly invitation to the Harvard-Princeton game.
    </p>
    <p>
      Jesse Ferrenby had brought her to a smaller game a few weeks before, and
      had pressed Burne into service&mdash;to the ruination of the latter&rsquo;s
      misogyny.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you coming to the Harvard game?&rdquo; Burne had asked indiscreetly, merely
      to make conversation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you ask me,&rdquo; cried Phyllis quickly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I do,&rdquo; said Burne feebly. He was unversed in the arts of
      Phyllis, and was sure that this was merely a vapid form of kidding. Before
      an hour had passed he knew that he was indeed involved. Phyllis had pinned
      him down and served him up, informed him the train she was arriving by,
      and depressed him thoroughly. Aside from loathing Phyllis, he had
      particularly wanted to stag that game and entertain some Harvard friends.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She&rsquo;ll see,&rdquo; he informed a delegation who arrived in his room to josh
      him. &ldquo;This will be the last game she ever persuades any young innocent to
      take her to!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, Burne&mdash;why did you <i>invite</i> her if you didn&rsquo;t want her?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Burne, you <i>know</i> you&rsquo;re secretly mad about her&mdash;that&rsquo;s the <i>real</i>
      trouble.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What can <i>you</i> do, Burne? What can <i>you</i> do against Phyllis?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Burne only shook his head and muttered threats which consisted largely
      of the phrase: &ldquo;She&rsquo;ll see, she&rsquo;ll see!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The blithesome Phyllis bore her twenty-five summers gayly from the train,
      but on the platform a ghastly sight met her eyes. There were Burne and
      Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college
      posters. They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and
      gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned
      up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their
      celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black arm-bands
      with orange &ldquo;P&rsquo;s,&rdquo; and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect
      completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs. On
      a clanking chain they led a large, angry tom-cat, painted to represent a
      tiger.
    </p>
    <p>
      A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between
      horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw
      dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in
      loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name &ldquo;Phyllis&rdquo; to the
      end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the
      campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins&mdash;to the stifled
      laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that
      this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two
      varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time.
    </p>
    <p>
      Phyllis&rsquo;s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands,
      where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined. She tried to
      walk a little ahead, she tried to walk a little behind&mdash;but they
      stayed close, that there should be no doubt whom she was with, talking in
      loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost
      hear her acquaintances whispering:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Phyllis Styles must be <i>awfully hard up</i> to have to come with <i>those
      two</i>.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      That had been Burne, dynamically humorous, fundamentally serious. From
      that root had blossomed the energy that he was now trying to orient with
      progress....
    </p>
    <p>
      So the weeks passed and March came and the clay feet that Amory looked for
      failed to appear. About a hundred juniors and seniors resigned from their
      clubs in a final fury of righteousness, and the clubs in helplessness
      turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule. Every one who knew him
      liked him&mdash;but what he stood for (and he began to stand for more all
      the time) came under the lash of many tongues, until a frailer man than he
      would have been snowed under.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you mind losing prestige?&rdquo; asked Amory one night. They had taken to
      exchanging calls several times a week.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I don&rsquo;t. What&rsquo;s prestige, at best?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Some people say that you&rsquo;re just a rather original politician.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He roared with laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s what Fred Sloane told me to-day. I suppose I have it coming.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      One afternoon they dipped into a subject that had interested Amory for a
      long time&mdash;the matter of the bearing of physical attributes on a
      man&rsquo;s make-up. Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course health counts&mdash;a healthy man has twice the chance of being
      good,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t agree with you&mdash;I don&rsquo;t believe in &lsquo;muscular Christianity.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do&mdash;I believe Christ had great physical vigor.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no,&rdquo; Amory protested. &ldquo;He worked too hard for that. I imagine that
      when he died he was a broken-down man&mdash;and the great saints haven&rsquo;t
      been strong.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Half of them have.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, even granting that, I don&rsquo;t think health has anything to do with
      goodness; of course, it&rsquo;s valuable to a great saint to be able to stand
      enormous strains, but this fad of popular preachers rising on their toes
      in simulated virility, bellowing that calisthenics will save the world&mdash;no,
      Burne, I can&rsquo;t go that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, let&rsquo;s waive it&mdash;we won&rsquo;t get anywhere, and besides I haven&rsquo;t
      quite made up my mind about it myself. Now, here&rsquo;s something I <i>do</i>
      know&mdash;personal appearance has a lot to do with it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Coloring?&rdquo; Amory asked eagerly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s what Tom and I figured,&rdquo; Amory agreed. &ldquo;We took the year-books for
      the last ten years and looked at the pictures of the senior council. I
      know you don&rsquo;t think much of that august body, but it does represent
      success here in a general way. Well, I suppose only about thirty-five per
      cent of every class here are blonds, are really light&mdash;yet <i>two-thirds</i>
      of every senior council are light. We looked at pictures of ten years of
      them, mind you; that means that out of every <i>fifteen</i> light-haired
      men in the senior class <i>one</i> is on the senior council, and of the
      dark-haired men it&rsquo;s only one in <i>fifty</i>.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s true,&rdquo; Burne agreed. &ldquo;The light-haired man <i>is</i> a higher type,
      generally speaking. I worked the thing out with the Presidents of the
      United States once, and found that way over half of them were light-haired&mdash;yet
      think of the preponderant number of brunettes in the race.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;People unconsciously admit it,&rdquo; said Amory. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll notice a blond person
      is <i>expected</i> to talk. If a blond girl doesn&rsquo;t talk we call her a
      &lsquo;doll&rsquo;; if a light-haired man is silent he&rsquo;s considered stupid. Yet the
      world is full of &lsquo;dark silent men&rsquo; and &lsquo;languorous brunettes&rsquo; who haven&rsquo;t
      a brain in their heads, but somehow are never accused of the dearth.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And the large mouth and broad chin and rather big nose undoubtedly make
      the superior face.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not so sure.&rdquo; Amory was all for classical features.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, yes&mdash;I&rsquo;ll show you,&rdquo; and Burne pulled out of his desk a
      photographic collection of heavily bearded, shaggy celebrities&mdash;Tolstoi,
      Whitman, Carpenter, and others.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aren&rsquo;t they wonderful?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory tried politely to appreciate them, and gave up laughingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Burne, I think they&rsquo;re the ugliest-looking crowd I ever came across. They
      look like an old man&rsquo;s home.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Amory, look at that forehead on Emerson; look at Tolstoi&rsquo;s eyes.&rdquo; His
      tone was reproachful.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory shook his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No! Call them remarkable-looking or anything you want&mdash;but ugly they
      certainly are.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Unabashed, Burne ran his hand lovingly across the spacious foreheads, and
      piling up the pictures put them back in his desk.
    </p>
    <p>
      Walking at night was one of his favorite pursuits, and one night he
      persuaded Amory to accompany him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hate the dark,&rdquo; Amory objected. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t use to&mdash;except when I
      was particularly imaginative, but now, I really do&mdash;I&rsquo;m a regular
      fool about it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s useless, you know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite possibly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll go east,&rdquo; Burne suggested, &ldquo;and down that string of roads through
      the woods.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Doesn&rsquo;t sound very appealing to me,&rdquo; admitted Amory reluctantly, &ldquo;but
      let&rsquo;s go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk
      argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,&rdquo; said Burne
      earnestly. &ldquo;And this very walking at night is one of the things I was
      afraid about. I&rsquo;m going to tell you why I can walk anywhere now and not be
      afraid.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go on,&rdquo; Amory urged eagerly. They were striding toward the woods, Burne&rsquo;s
      nervous, enthusiastic voice warming to his subject.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I used to come out here alone at night, oh, three months ago, and I
      always stopped at that cross-road we just passed. There were the woods
      looming up ahead, just as they do now, there were dogs howling and the
      shadows and no human sound. Of course, I peopled the woods with everything
      ghastly, just like you do; don&rsquo;t you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do,&rdquo; Amory admitted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I began analyzing it&mdash;my imagination persisted in sticking
      horrors into the dark&mdash;so I stuck my imagination into the dark
      instead, and let it look out at me&mdash;I let it play stray dog or
      escaped convict or ghost, and then saw myself coming along the road. That
      made it all right&mdash;as it always makes everything all right to project
      yourself completely into another&rsquo;s place. I knew that if I were the dog or
      the convict or the ghost I wouldn&rsquo;t be a menace to Burne Holiday any more
      than he was a menace to me. Then I thought of my watch. I&rsquo;d better go back
      and leave it and then essay the woods. No; I decided, it&rsquo;s better on the
      whole that I should lose a watch than that I should turn back&mdash;and I
      did go into them&mdash;not only followed the road through them, but walked
      into them until I wasn&rsquo;t frightened any more&mdash;did it until one night
      I sat down and dozed off in there; then I knew I was through being afraid
      of the dark.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lordy,&rdquo; Amory breathed. &ldquo;I couldn&rsquo;t have done that. I&rsquo;d have come out
      half-way, and the first time an automobile passed and made the dark
      thicker when its lamps disappeared, I&rsquo;d have come in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; Burne said suddenly, after a few moments&rsquo; silence, &ldquo;we&rsquo;re half-way
      through, let&rsquo;s turn back.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      On the return he launched into a discussion of will.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the whole thing,&rdquo; he asserted. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the one dividing line between
      good and evil. I&rsquo;ve never met a man who led a rotten life and didn&rsquo;t have
      a weak will.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How about great criminals?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They&rsquo;re usually insane. If not, they&rsquo;re weak. There is no such thing as a
      strong, sane criminal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Burne, I disagree with you altogether; how about the superman?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s evil, I think, yet he&rsquo;s strong and sane.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve never met him. I&rsquo;ll bet, though, that he&rsquo;s stupid or insane.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve met him over and over and he&rsquo;s neither. That&rsquo;s why I think you&rsquo;re
      wrong.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure I&rsquo;m not&mdash;and so I don&rsquo;t believe in imprisonment except for
      the insane.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      On this point Amory could not agree. It seemed to him that life and
      history were rife with the strong criminal, keen, but often self-deluding;
      in politics and business one found him and among the old statesmen and
      kings and generals; but Burne never agreed and their courses began to
      split on that point.
    </p>
    <p>
      Burne was drawing farther and farther away from the world about him. He
      resigned the vice-presidency of the senior class and took to reading and
      walking as almost his only pursuits. He voluntarily attended graduate
      lectures in philosophy and biology, and sat in all of them with a rather
      pathetically intent look in his eyes, as if waiting for something the
      lecturer would never quite come to. Sometimes Amory would see him squirm
      in his seat; and his face would light up; he was on fire to debate a
      point.
    </p>
    <p>
      He grew more abstracted on the street and was even accused of becoming a
      snob, but Amory knew it was nothing of the sort, and once when Burne
      passed him four feet off, absolutely unseeingly, his mind a thousand miles
      away, Amory almost choked with the romantic joy of watching him. Burne
      seemed to be climbing heights where others would be forever unable to get
      a foothold.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I tell you,&rdquo; Amory declared to Tom, &ldquo;he&rsquo;s the first contemporary I&rsquo;ve
      ever met whom I&rsquo;ll admit is my superior in mental capacity.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a bad time to admit it&mdash;people are beginning to think he&rsquo;s
      odd.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s way over their heads&mdash;you know you think so yourself when you
      talk to him&mdash;Good Lord, Tom, you <i>used</i> to stand out against
      &lsquo;people.&rsquo; Success has completely conventionalized you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom grew rather annoyed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s he trying to do&mdash;be excessively holy?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No! not like anybody you&rsquo;ve ever seen. Never enters the Philadelphian
      Society. He has no faith in that rot. He doesn&rsquo;t believe that public
      swimming-pools and a kind word in time will right the wrongs of the world;
      moreover, he takes a drink whenever he feels like it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He certainly is getting in wrong.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you talked to him lately?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then you haven&rsquo;t any conception of him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The argument ended nowhere, but Amory noticed more than ever how the
      sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s odd,&rdquo; Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable
      on the subject, &ldquo;that the people who violently disapprove of Burne&rsquo;s
      radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class&mdash;I mean they&rsquo;re the
      best-educated men in college&mdash;the editors of the papers, like
      yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors.... The illiterate athletes
      like Langueduc think he&rsquo;s getting eccentric, but they just say, &lsquo;Good old
      Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,&rsquo; and pass on&mdash;the
      Pharisee class&mdash;Gee! they ridicule him unmercifully.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The next morning he met Burne hurrying along McCosh walk after a
      recitation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Whither bound, Tsar?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Over to the Prince office to see Ferrenby,&rdquo; he waved a copy of the
      morning&rsquo;s Princetonian at Amory. &ldquo;He wrote this editorial.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Going to flay him alive?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;but he&rsquo;s got me all balled up. Either I&rsquo;ve misjudged him or he&rsquo;s
      suddenly become the world&rsquo;s worst radical.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Burne hurried on, and it was several days before Amory heard an account of
      the ensuing conversation. Burne had come into the editor&rsquo;s sanctum
      displaying the paper cheerfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello, Jesse.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello there, Savonarola.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I just read your editorial.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good boy&mdash;didn&rsquo;t know you stooped that low.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Jesse, you startled me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How so?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aren&rsquo;t you afraid the faculty&rsquo;ll get after you if you pull this
      irreligious stuff?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Like this morning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What the devil&mdash;that editorial was on the coaching system.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but that quotation&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Jesse sat up.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What quotation?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know: &lsquo;He who is not with me is against me.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;what about it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Jesse was puzzled but not alarmed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, you say here&mdash;let me see.&rdquo; Burne opened the paper and read: &ldquo;&lsquo;<i>He
      who is not with me is against me</i>, as that gentleman said who was
      notoriously capable of only coarse distinctions and puerile
      generalities.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What of it?&rdquo; Ferrenby began to look alarmed. &ldquo;Oliver Cromwell said it,
      didn&rsquo;t he? or was it Washington, or one of the saints? Good Lord, I&rsquo;ve
      forgotten.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Burne roared with laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Jesse, oh, good, kind Jesse.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who said it, for Pete&rsquo;s sake?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said Burne, recovering his voice, &ldquo;St. Matthew attributes it to
      Christ.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My God!&rdquo; cried Jesse, and collapsed backward into the waste-basket.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      AMORY WRITES A POEM
    </p>
    <p>
      The weeks tore by. Amory wandered occasionally to New York on the chance
      of finding a new shining green auto-bus, that its stick-of-candy glamour
      might penetrate his disposition. One day he ventured into a stock-company
      revival of a play whose name was faintly familiar. The curtain rose&mdash;he
      watched casually as a girl entered. A few phrases rang in his ear and
      touched a faint chord of memory. Where&mdash;? When&mdash;?
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he seemed to hear a voice whispering beside him, a very soft, vibrant
      voice: &ldquo;Oh, I&rsquo;m such a poor little fool; <i>do</i> tell me when I do
      wrong.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The solution came in a flash and he had a quick, glad memory of Isabelle.
    </p>
    <p>
      He found a blank space on his programme, and began to scribble rapidly:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Here in the figured dark I watch once more,
      There, with the curtain, roll the years away;
      Two years of years&mdash;there was an idle day
    Of ours, when happy endings didn&rsquo;t bore
    Our unfermented souls; I could adore
      Your eager face beside me, wide-eyed, gay,
      Smiling a repertoire while the poor play
    Reached me as a faint ripple reaches shore.

   &ldquo;Yawning and wondering an evening through,
      I watch alone... and chatterings, of course,
      Spoil the one scene which, somehow, <i>did</i> have charms;
    You wept a bit, and I grew sad for you
      Right here!  Where Mr. X defends divorce
      And What&rsquo;s-Her-Name falls fainting in his arms.&rdquo;
 
</pre>
    <hr />
    <p>
      STILL CALM
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ghosts are such dumb things,&rdquo; said Alec, &ldquo;they&rsquo;re slow-witted. I can
      always outguess a ghost.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How?&rdquo; asked Tom.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, it depends where. Take a bedroom, for example. If you use <i>any</i>
      discretion a ghost can never get you in a bedroom.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go on, s&rsquo;pose you think there&rsquo;s maybe a ghost in your bedroom&mdash;what
      measures do you take on getting home at night?&rdquo; demanded Amory,
      interested.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take a stick&rdquo; answered Alec, with ponderous reverence, &ldquo;one about the
      length of a broom-handle. Now, the first thing to do is to get the room <i>cleared</i>&mdash;to
      do this you rush with your eyes closed into your study and turn on the
      lights&mdash;next, approaching the closet, carefully run the stick in the
      door three or four times. Then, if nothing happens, you can look in. <i>Always,
      always</i> run the stick in viciously first&mdash;<i>never</i> look
      first!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course, that&rsquo;s the ancient Celtic school,&rdquo; said Tom gravely.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;but they usually pray first. Anyway, you use this method to
      clear the closets and also for behind all doors&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And the bed,&rdquo; Amory suggested.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Amory, no!&rdquo; cried Alec in horror. &ldquo;That isn&rsquo;t the way&mdash;the bed
      requires different tactics&mdash;let the bed alone, as you value your
      reason&mdash;if there is a ghost in the room and that&rsquo;s only about a third
      of the time, it is <i>almost always</i> under the bed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&rdquo; Amory began.
    </p>
    <p>
      Alec waved him into silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of <i>course</i> you never look. You stand in the middle of the floor and
      before he knows what you&rsquo;re going to do make a sudden leap for the bed&mdash;never
      walk near the bed; to a ghost your ankle is your most vulnerable part&mdash;once
      in bed, you&rsquo;re safe; he may lie around under the bed all night, but you&rsquo;re
      safe as daylight. If you still have doubts pull the blanket over your
      head.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All that&rsquo;s very interesting, Tom.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; Alec beamed proudly. &ldquo;All my own, too&mdash;the Sir Oliver
      Lodge of the new world.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory was enjoying college immensely again. The sense of going forward in
      a direct, determined line had come back; youth was stirring and shaking
      out a few new feathers. He had even stored enough surplus energy to sally
      into a new pose.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s the idea of all this &lsquo;distracted&rsquo; stuff, Amory?&rdquo; asked Alec one
      day, and then as Amory pretended to be cramped over his book in a daze:
      &ldquo;Oh, don&rsquo;t try to act Burne, the mystic, to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory looked up innocently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo; mimicked Alec. &ldquo;Are you trying to read yourself into a rhapsody
      with&mdash;let&rsquo;s see the book.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He snatched it; regarded it derisively.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo; said Amory a little stiffly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;The Life of St. Teresa,&rsquo;&rdquo; read Alec aloud. &ldquo;Oh, my gosh!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Say, Alec.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Does it bother you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Does what bother me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My acting dazed and all that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, no&mdash;of course it doesn&rsquo;t <i>bother</i> me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, then, don&rsquo;t spoil it. If I enjoy going around telling people
      guilelessly that I think I&rsquo;m a genius, let me do it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re getting a reputation for being eccentric,&rdquo; said Alec, laughing,
      &ldquo;if that&rsquo;s what you mean.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory finally prevailed, and Alec agreed to accept his face value in the
      presence of others if he was allowed rest periods when they were alone; so
      Amory &ldquo;ran it out&rdquo; at a great rate, bringing the most eccentric characters
      to dinner, wild-eyed grad students, preceptors with strange theories of
      God and government, to the cynical amazement of the supercilious Cottage
      Club.
    </p>
    <p>
      As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory
      went several times to spend week-ends with Monsignor; once he took Burne,
      with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them
      to each other. Monsignor took him several times to see Thornton Hancock,
      and once or twice to the house of a Mrs. Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting
      American whom Amory liked immediately.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then one day came a letter from Monsignor, which appended an interesting
      P. S.:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;Do you know,&rdquo; it ran, &ldquo;that your third cousin, Clara Page,
  widowed six months and very poor, is living in Philadelphia?
  I don&rsquo;t think you&rsquo;ve ever met her, but I wish, as a favor to me,
  you&rsquo;d go to see her.  To my mind, she&rsquo;s rather a remarkable woman,
  and just about your age.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Amory sighed and decided to go, as a favor....
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      CLARA
    </p>
    <p>
      She was immemorial.... Amory wasn&rsquo;t good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply
      golden hair, but then no man was. Her goodness was above the prosy morals
      of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he
      thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a
      realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was
      compelled to face. She was alone in the world, with two small children,
      little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends. He saw her that winter
      in Philadelphia entertaining a houseful of men for an evening, when he
      knew she had not a servant in the house except the little colored girl
      guarding the babies overhead. He saw one of the greatest libertines in
      that city, a man who was habitually drunk and notorious at home and
      abroad, sitting opposite her for an evening, discussing <i>girls&rsquo; 
      boarding-schools</i> with a sort of innocent excitement. What a twist
      Clara had to her mind! She could make fascinating and almost brilliant
      conversation out of the thinnest air that ever floated through a
      drawing-room.
    </p>
    <p>
      The idea that the girl was poverty-stricken had appealed to Amory&rsquo;s sense
      of situation. He arrived in Philadelphia expecting to be told that 921 Ark
      Street was in a miserable lane of hovels. He was even disappointed when it
      proved to be nothing of the sort. It was an old house that had been in her
      husband&rsquo;s family for years. An elderly aunt, who objected to having it
      sold, had put ten years&rsquo; taxes with a lawyer and pranced off to Honolulu,
      leaving Clara to struggle with the heating-problem as best she could. So
      no wild-haired woman with a hungry baby at her breast and a sad
      Amelia-like look greeted him. Instead, Amory would have thought from his
      reception that she had not a care in the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her
      level-headedness&mdash;into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge.
      She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to
      stultify herself with such &ldquo;household arts&rdquo; as <i>knitting</i> and <i>embroidery</i>),
      yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a
      formless cloud with the wind. Deepest of all in her personality was the
      golden radiance that she diffused around her. As an open fire in a dark
      room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she
      cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made
      of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed
      the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful
      originality. At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory. He
      considered his own uniqueness sufficient, and it rather embarrassed him
      when she tried to read new interests into him for the benefit of what
      other adorers were present. He felt as if a polite but insistent
      stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a
      part he had conned for years.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Clara talking, Clara telling a slender tale of a hatpin and an
      inebriated man and herself.... People tried afterward to repeat her
      anecdotes but for the life of them they could make them sound like nothing
      whatever. They gave her a sort of innocent attention and the best smiles
      many of them had smiled for long; there were few tears in Clara, but
      people smiled misty-eyed at her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very occasionally Amory stayed for little half-hours after the rest of the
      court had gone, and they would have bread and jam and tea late in the
      afternoon or &ldquo;maple-sugar lunches,&rdquo; as she called them, at night.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You <i>are</i> remarkable, aren&rsquo;t you!&rdquo; Amory was becoming trite from
      where he perched in the centre of the dining-room table one six o&rsquo;clock.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a bit,&rdquo; she answered. She was searching out napkins in the sideboard.
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m really most humdrum and commonplace. One of those people who have no
      interest in anything but their children.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell that to somebody else,&rdquo; scoffed Amory. &ldquo;You know you&rsquo;re perfectly
      effulgent.&rdquo; He asked her the one thing that he knew might embarrass her.
      It was the remark that the first bore made to Adam.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me about yourself.&rdquo; And she gave the answer that Adam must have
      given.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s nothing to tell.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But eventually Adam probably told the bore all the things he thought about
      at night when the locusts sang in the sandy grass, and he must have
      remarked patronizingly how <i>different</i> he was from Eve, forgetting
      how different she was from him... at any rate, Clara told Amory much about
      herself that evening. She had had a harried life from sixteen on, and her
      education had stopped sharply with her leisure. Browsing in her library,
      Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he
      impudently opened. It was a poem that she had written at school about a
      gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the
      wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world. As a
      rule such sentiment bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity
      and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara
      on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to
      see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside. He envied that
      poem. How he would have loved to have come along and seen her on the wall
      and talked nonsense or romance to her, perched above him in the air. He
      began to be frightfully jealous of everything about Clara: of her past, of
      her babies, of the men and women who flocked to drink deep of her cool
      kindness and rest their tired minds as at an absorbing play.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;<i>Nobody</i> seems to bore you,&rdquo; he objected.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About half the world do,&rdquo; she admitted, &ldquo;but I think that&rsquo;s a pretty good
      average, don&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; and she turned to find something in Browning that
      bore on the subject. She was the only person he ever met who could look up
      passages and quotations to show him in the middle of the conversation, and
      yet not be irritating to distraction. She did it constantly, with such a
      serious enthusiasm that he grew fond of watching her golden hair bent over
      a book, brow wrinkled ever so little at hunting her sentence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Through early March he took to going to Philadelphia for week-ends. Almost
      always there was some one else there and she seemed not anxious to see him
      alone, for many occasions presented themselves when a word from her would
      have given him another delicious half-hour of adoration. But he fell
      gradually in love and began to speculate wildly on marriage. Though this
      design flowed through his brain even to his lips, still he knew afterward
      that the desire had not been deeply rooted. Once he dreamt that it had
      come true and woke up in a cold panic, for in his dream she had been a
      silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes
      falling insipidly from her changeling tongue. But she was the first fine
      woman he ever knew and one of the few good people who ever interested him.
      She made her goodness such an asset. Amory had decided that most good
      people either dragged theirs after them as a liability, or else distorted
      it to artificial geniality, and of course there were the ever-present prig
      and Pharisee&mdash;(but Amory never included <i>them</i> as being among
      the saved).
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      ST. CECILIA
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Over her gray and velvet dress,
      Under her molten, beaten hair,
    Color of rose in mock distress
      Flushes and fades and makes her fair;
    Fills the air from her to him
      With light and languor and little sighs,
    Just so subtly he scarcely knows...
      Laughing lightning, color of rose.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you like me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I do,&rdquo; said Clara seriously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, we have some qualities in common. Things that are spontaneous in
      each of us&mdash;or were originally.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re implying that I haven&rsquo;t used myself very well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Clara hesitated.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I can&rsquo;t judge. A man, of course, has to go through a lot more, and
      I&rsquo;ve been sheltered.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, don&rsquo;t stall, please, Clara,&rdquo; Amory interrupted; &ldquo;but do talk about me
      a little, won&rsquo;t you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Surely, I&rsquo;d adore to.&rdquo; She didn&rsquo;t smile.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s sweet of you. First answer some questions. Am I painfully
      conceited?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;no, you have tremendous vanity, but it&rsquo;ll amuse the people who
      notice its preponderance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I see.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re really humble at heart. You sink to the third hell of depression
      when you think you&rsquo;ve been slighted. In fact, you haven&rsquo;t much
      self-respect.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Centre of target twice, Clara. How do you do it? You never let me say a
      word.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course not&mdash;I can never judge a man while he&rsquo;s talking. But I&rsquo;m
      not through; the reason you have so little real self-confidence, even
      though you gravely announce to the occasional philistine that you think
      you&rsquo;re a genius, is that you&rsquo;ve attributed all sorts of atrocious faults
      to yourself and are trying to live up to them. For instance, you&rsquo;re always
      saying that you are a slave to high-balls.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I am, potentially.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you say you&rsquo;re a weak character, that you&rsquo;ve no will.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a bit of will&mdash;I&rsquo;m a slave to my emotions, to my likes, to my
      hatred of boredom, to most of my desires&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are not!&rdquo; She brought one little fist down onto the other. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re a
      slave, a bound helpless slave to one thing in the world, your
      imagination.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You certainly interest me. If this isn&rsquo;t boring you, go on.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I notice that when you want to stay over an extra day from college you go
      about it in a sure way. You never decide at first while the merits of
      going or staying are fairly clear in your mind. You let your imagination
      shinny on the side of your desires for a few hours, and then you decide.
      Naturally your imagination, after a little freedom, thinks up a million
      reasons why you should stay, so your decision when it comes isn&rsquo;t true.
      It&rsquo;s biassed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; objected Amory, &ldquo;but isn&rsquo;t it lack of will-power to let my
      imagination shinny on the wrong side?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear boy, there&rsquo;s your big mistake. This has nothing to do with
      will-power; that&rsquo;s a crazy, useless word, anyway; you lack judgment&mdash;the
      judgment to decide at once when you know your imagination will play you
      false, given half a chance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I&rsquo;ll be darned!&rdquo; exclaimed Amory in surprise, &ldquo;that&rsquo;s the last
      thing I expected.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Clara didn&rsquo;t gloat. She changed the subject immediately. But she had
      started him thinking and he believed she was partly right. He felt like a
      factory-owner who after accusing a clerk of dishonesty finds that his own
      son, in the office, is changing the books once a week. His poor,
      mistreated will that he had been holding up to the scorn of himself and
      his friends, stood before him innocent, and his judgment walked off to
      prison with the unconfinable imp, imagination, dancing in mocking glee
      beside him. Clara&rsquo;s was the only advice he ever asked without dictating
      the answer himself&mdash;except, perhaps, in his talks with Monsignor
      Darcy.
    </p>
    <p>
      How he loved to do any sort of thing with Clara! Shopping with her was a
      rare, epicurean dream. In every store where she had ever traded she was
      whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll bet she won&rsquo;t stay single long.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, don&rsquo;t scream it out. She ain&rsquo;t lookin&rsquo; for no advice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;<i>Ain&rsquo;t</i> she beautiful!&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   (Enter a floor-walker&mdash;silence till he moves forward, smirking.)
</pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Society person, ain&rsquo;t she?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yeah, but poor now, I guess; so they say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Gee! girls, <i>ain&rsquo;t</i> she some kid!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And Clara beamed on all alike. Amory believed that tradespeople gave her
      discounts, sometimes to her knowledge and sometimes without it. He knew
      she dressed very well, had always the best of everything in the house, and
      was inevitably waited upon by the head floor-walker at the very least.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sometimes they would go to church together on Sunday and he would walk
      beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new
      air. She was very devout, always had been, and God knows what heights she
      attained and what strength she drew down to herself when she knelt and
      bent her golden hair into the stained-glass light.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;St. Cecelia,&rdquo; he cried aloud one day, quite involuntarily, and the people
      turned and peered, and the priest paused in his sermon and Clara and Amory
      turned to fiery red.
    </p>
    <p>
      That was the last Sunday they had, for he spoiled it all that night. He
      couldn&rsquo;t help it.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were walking through the March twilight where it was as warm as June,
      and the joy of youth filled his soul so that he felt he must speak.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think,&rdquo; he said and his voice trembled, &ldquo;that if I lost faith in you
      I&rsquo;d lose faith in God.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked at him with such a startled face that he asked her the matter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing,&rdquo; she said slowly, &ldquo;only this: five men have said that to me
      before, and it frightens me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Clara, is that your fate!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She did not answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose love to you is&mdash;&rdquo; he began.
    </p>
    <p>
      She turned like a flash.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have never been in love.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They walked along, and he realized slowly how much she had told him...
      never in love.... She seemed suddenly a daughter of light alone. His
      entity dropped out of her plane and he longed only to touch her dress with
      almost the realization that Joseph must have had of Mary&rsquo;s eternal
      significance. But quite mechanically he heard himself saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I love you&mdash;any latent greatness that I&rsquo;ve got is... oh, I can&rsquo;t
      talk, but Clara, if I come back in two years in a position to marry you&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She shook her head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; she said; &ldquo;I&rsquo;d never marry again. I&rsquo;ve got my two children and I
      want myself for them. I like you&mdash;I like all clever men, you more
      than any&mdash;but you know me well enough to know that I&rsquo;d never marry a
      clever man&mdash;&rdquo; She broke off suddenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not in love with me. You never wanted to marry me, did you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was the twilight,&rdquo; he said wonderingly. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t feel as though I
      were speaking aloud. But I love you&mdash;or adore you&mdash;or worship
      you&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There you go&mdash;running through your catalogue of emotions in five
      seconds.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He smiled unwillingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t make me out such a light-weight, Clara; you <i>are</i> depressing
      sometimes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re not a light-weight, of all things,&rdquo; she said intently, taking his
      arm and opening wide her eyes&mdash;he could see their kindliness in the
      fading dusk. &ldquo;A light-weight is an eternal nay.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There&rsquo;s so much spring in the air&mdash;there&rsquo;s so much lazy sweetness in
      your heart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She dropped his arm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re all fine now, and I feel glorious. Give me a cigarette. You&rsquo;ve
      never seen me smoke, have you? Well, I do, about once a month.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And then that wonderful girl and Amory raced to the corner like two mad
      children gone wild with pale-blue twilight.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m going to the country for to-morrow,&rdquo; she announced, as she stood
      panting, safe beyond the flare of the corner lamp-post. &ldquo;These days are
      too magnificent to miss, though perhaps I feel them more in the city.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Clara!&rdquo; Amory said; &ldquo;what a devil you could have been if the Lord had
      just bent your soul a little the other way!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Maybe,&rdquo; she answered; &ldquo;but I think not. I&rsquo;m never really wild and never
      have been. That little outburst was pure spring.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you are, too,&rdquo; said he.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were walking along now.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;you&rsquo;re wrong again, how can a person of your own self-reputed
      brains be so constantly wrong about me? I&rsquo;m the opposite of everything
      spring ever stood for. It&rsquo;s unfortunate, if I happen to look like what
      pleased some soppy old Greek sculptor, but I assure you that if it weren&rsquo;t
      for my face I&rsquo;d be a quiet nun in the convent without&rdquo;&mdash;then she
      broke into a run and her raised voice floated back to him as he followed&mdash;&ldquo;my
      precious babies, which I must go back and see.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was the only girl he ever knew with whom he could understand how
      another man might be preferred. Often Amory met wives whom he had known as
      debutantes, and looking intently at them imagined that he found something
      in their faces which said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, if I could only have gotten <i>you!</i>&rdquo; Oh, the enormous conceit of
      the man!
    </p>
    <p>
      But that night seemed a night of stars and singing and Clara&rsquo;s bright soul
      still gleamed on the ways they had trod.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Golden, golden is the air&mdash;&rdquo; he chanted to the little pools of
      water. ... &ldquo;Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden
      frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair.... Skeins from braided
      basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would
      know or ask it?... who could give such gold...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      AMORY IS RESENTFUL
    </p>
    <p>
      Slowly and inevitably, yet with a sudden surge at the last, while Amory
      talked and dreamed, war rolled swiftly up the beach and washed the sands
      where Princeton played. Every night the gymnasium echoed as platoon after
      platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basket-ball markings.
      When Amory went to Washington the next week-end he caught some of the
      spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming
      back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens&mdash;Greeks,
      he guessed, or Russians. He thought how much easier patriotism had been to
      a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the
      Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought. And he did no sleeping that
      night, but listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the
      car with the heavy scent of latest America.
    </p>
    <p>
      In Princeton every one bantered in public and told themselves privately
      that their deaths at least would be heroic. The literary students read
      Rupert Brooke passionately; the lounge-lizards worried over whether the
      government would permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the
      hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department,
      seeking an easy commission and a soft berth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would
      be futile&mdash;Burne had come out as a pacifist. The socialist magazines,
      a great smattering of Tolstoi, and his own intense longing for a cause
      that would bring out whatever strength lay in him, had finally decided him
      to preach peace as a subjective ideal.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When the German army entered Belgium,&rdquo; he began, &ldquo;if the inhabitants had
      gone peaceably about their business, the German army would have been
      disorganized in&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; Amory interrupted, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve heard it all. But I&rsquo;m not going to talk
      propaganda with you. There&rsquo;s a chance that you&rsquo;re right&mdash;but even so
      we&rsquo;re hundreds of years before the time when non-resistance can touch us
      as a reality.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, Amory, listen&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Burne, we&rsquo;d just argue&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just one thing&mdash;I don&rsquo;t ask you to think of your family or friends,
      because I know they don&rsquo;t count a picayune with you beside your sense of
      duty&mdash;but, Burne, how do you know that the magazines you read and the
      societies you join and these idealists you meet aren&rsquo;t just plain <i>German?</i>&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Some of them are, of course.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you know they aren&rsquo;t <i>all</i> pro-German&mdash;just a lot of
      weak ones&mdash;with German-Jewish names.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s the chance, of course,&rdquo; he said slowly. &ldquo;How much or how little
      I&rsquo;m taking this stand because of propaganda I&rsquo;ve heard, I don&rsquo;t know;
      naturally I think that it&rsquo;s my most innermost conviction&mdash;it seems a
      path spread before me just now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory&rsquo;s heart sank.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But think of the cheapness of it&mdash;no one&rsquo;s really going to martyr
      you for being a pacifist&mdash;it&rsquo;s just going to throw you in with the
      worst&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I doubt it,&rdquo; he interrupted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, it all smells of Bohemian New York to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know what you mean, and that&rsquo;s why I&rsquo;m not sure I&rsquo;ll agitate.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re one man, Burne&mdash;going to talk to people who won&rsquo;t listen&mdash;with
      all God&rsquo;s given you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s what Stephen must have thought many years ago. But he preached his
      sermon and they killed him. He probably thought as he was dying what a
      waste it all was. But you see, I&rsquo;ve always felt that Stephen&rsquo;s death was
      the thing that occurred to Paul on the road to Damascus, and sent him to
      preach the word of Christ all over the world.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go on.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s all&mdash;this is my particular duty. Even if right now I&rsquo;m just a
      pawn&mdash;just sacrificed. God! Amory&mdash;you don&rsquo;t think I like the
      Germans!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I can&rsquo;t say anything else&mdash;I get to the end of all the logic
      about non-resistance, and there, like an excluded middle, stands the huge
      spectre of man as he is and always will be. And this spectre stands right
      beside the one logical necessity of Tolstoi&rsquo;s, and the other logical
      necessity of Nietzsche&rsquo;s&mdash;&rdquo; Amory broke off suddenly. &ldquo;When are you
      going?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m going next week.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll see you, of course.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As he walked away it seemed to Amory that the look in his face bore a
      great resemblance to that in Kerry&rsquo;s when he had said good-by under Blair
      Arch two years before. Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into
      anything with the primal honesty of those two.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Burne&rsquo;s a fanatic,&rdquo; he said to Tom, &ldquo;and he&rsquo;s dead wrong and, I&rsquo;m
      inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic
      publishers and German-paid rag wavers&mdash;but he haunts me&mdash;just
      leaving everything worth while&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later. He sold all his
      possessions and came down to the room to say good-by, with a battered old
      bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Peter the Hermit bidding farewell to Cardinal Richelieu,&rdquo; suggested Alec,
      who was lounging in the window-seat as Burne and Amory shook hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Amory was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne&rsquo;s long legs
      propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew
      he was going to have a bad week. Not that he doubted the war&mdash;Germany
      stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction
      of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne&rsquo;s face stayed in
      his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What on earth is the use of suddenly running down Goethe,&rdquo; he declared to
      Alec and Tom. &ldquo;Why write books to prove he started the war&mdash;or that
      that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you ever read anything of theirs?&rdquo; asked Tom shrewdly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; Amory admitted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Neither have I,&rdquo; he said laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;People will shout,&rdquo; said Alec quietly, &ldquo;but Goethe&rsquo;s on his same old
      shelf in the library&mdash;to bore any one that wants to read him!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory subsided, and the subject dropped.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What are you going to do, Amory?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Infantry or aviation, I can&rsquo;t make up my mind&mdash;I hate mechanics, but
      then of course aviation&rsquo;s the thing for me&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I feel as Amory does,&rdquo; said Tom. &ldquo;Infantry or aviation&mdash;aviation
      sounds like the romantic side of the war, of course&mdash;like cavalry
      used to be, you know; but like Amory I don&rsquo;t know a horse-power from a
      piston-rod.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Somehow Amory&rsquo;s dissatisfaction with his lack of enthusiasm culminated in
      an attempt to put the blame for the whole war on the ancestors of his
      generation... all the people who cheered for Germany in 1870.... All the
      materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency.
      So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard &ldquo;Locksley Hall&rdquo; quoted
      and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood
      for&mdash;for he took him as a representative of the Victorians.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep
  Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap&mdash;
</pre>
    <p>
      scribbled Amory in his note-book. The lecturer was saying something about
      Tennyson&rsquo;s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes. Amory turned
      over to a fresh page and began scrawling again.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 &ldquo;They shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about,
  They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And entitled A Song in the Time of Order,&rdquo; came the professor&rsquo;s voice,
      droning far away. &ldquo;Time of Order&rdquo;&mdash;Good Lord! Everything crammed in
      the box and the Victorians sitting on the lid smiling serenely.... With
      Browning in his Italian villa crying bravely: &ldquo;All&rsquo;s for the best.&rdquo; Amory
      scribbled again.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 &ldquo;You knelt up in the temple and he bent to hear you pray,
  You thanked him for your &lsquo;glorious gains&rsquo;&mdash;reproached him for
    &lsquo;Cathay.&rsquo;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Why could he never get more than a couplet at a time? Now he needed
      something to rhyme with:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 &ldquo;You would keep Him straight with science, tho He had gone wrong
    before...&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Well, anyway....
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 &ldquo;You met your children in your home&mdash;&lsquo;I&rsquo;ve fixed it up!&rsquo; you cried,
  Took your fifty years of Europe, and then virtuously&mdash;died.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That was to a great extent Tennyson&rsquo;s idea,&rdquo; came the lecturer&rsquo;s voice.
      &ldquo;Swinburne&rsquo;s Song in the Time of Order might well have been Tennyson&rsquo;s
      title. He idealized order against chaos, against waste.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At last Amory had it. He turned over another page and scrawled vigorously
      for the twenty minutes that was left of the hour. Then he walked up to the
      desk and deposited a page torn out of his note-book.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s a poem to the Victorians, sir,&rdquo; he said coldly.
    </p>
    <p>
      The professor picked it up curiously while Amory backed rapidly through
      the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here is what he had written:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Songs in the time of order
      You left for us to sing,
        Proofs with excluded middles,
          Answers to life in rhyme,
    Keys of the prison warder
      And ancient bells to ring,
        Time was the end of riddles,
          We were the end of time...

    Here were domestic oceans
      And a sky that we might reach,
        Guns and a guarded border,
          Gantlets&mdash;but not to fling,
    Thousands of old emotions
      And a platitude for each,
        Songs in the time of order&mdash;
          And tongues, that we might sing.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <hr />
    <p>
      THE END OF MANY THINGS
    </p>
    <p>
      Early April slipped by in a haze&mdash;a haze of long evenings on the club
      veranda with the graphophone playing &ldquo;Poor Butterfly&rdquo; inside... for &ldquo;Poor
      Butterfly&rdquo; had been the song of that last year. The war seemed scarcely to
      touch them and it might have been one of the senior springs of the past,
      except for the drilling every other afternoon, yet Amory realized
      poignantly that this was the last spring under the old regime.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is the great protest against the superman,&rdquo; said Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I suppose so,&rdquo; Alec agreed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s absolutely irreconcilable with any Utopia. As long as he occurs,
      there&rsquo;s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway
      when he talks.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And of course all that he is is a gifted man without a moral sense.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s all. I think the worst thing to contemplate is this&mdash;it&rsquo;s all
      happened before, how soon will it happen again? Fifty years after Waterloo
      Napoleon was as much a hero to English school children as Wellington. How
      do we know our grandchildren won&rsquo;t idolize Von Hindenburg the same way?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What brings it about?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Time, damn it, and the historian. If we could only learn to look on evil
      as evil, whether it&rsquo;s clothed in filth or monotony or magnificence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;God! Haven&rsquo;t we raked the universe over the coals for four years?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then the night came that was to be the last. Tom and Amory, bound in the
      morning for different training-camps, paced the shadowy walks as usual and
      seemed still to see around them the faces of the men they knew.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The grass is full of ghosts to-night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The whole campus is alive with them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They paused by Little and watched the moon rise, to make silver of the
      slate roof of Dodd and blue the rustling trees.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know,&rdquo; whispered Tom, &ldquo;what we feel now is the sense of all the
      gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A last burst of singing flooded up from Blair Arch&mdash;broken voices for
      some long parting.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what we leave here is more than this class; it&rsquo;s the whole heritage
      of youth. We&rsquo;re just one generation&mdash;we&rsquo;re breaking all the links
      that seemed to bind us here to top-booted and high-stocked generations.
      We&rsquo;ve walked arm and arm with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee through half
      these deep-blue nights.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s what they are,&rdquo; Tom tangented off, &ldquo;deep blue&mdash;a bit of color
      would spoil them, make them exotic. Spires, against a sky that&rsquo;s a promise
      of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs&mdash;it hurts... rather&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-by, Aaron Burr,&rdquo; Amory called toward deserted Nassau Hall, &ldquo;you and
      I knew strange corners of life.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His voice echoed in the stillness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The torches are out,&rdquo; whispered Tom. &ldquo;Ah, Messalina, the long shadows are
      building minarets on the stadium&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      For an instant the voices of freshman year surged around them and then
      they looked at each other with faint tears in their eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Damn!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Damn!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The last light fades and drifts across the land&mdash;the low, long land,
      the sunny land of spires; the ghosts of evening tune again their lyres and
      wander singing in a plaintive band down the long corridors of trees; pale
      fires echo the night from tower top to tower: Oh, sleep that dreams, and
      dream that never tires, press from the petals of the lotus flower
      something of this to keep, the essence of an hour.
    </p>
    <p>
      No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star
      and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy
      afternoon. Here, Heraclitus, did you find in fire and shifting things the
      prophecy you hurled down the dead years; this midnight my desire will see,
      shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness
      of the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0006" id="link2H_4_0006">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      INTERLUDE
    </h2>
    <h3>
      May, 1917-February, 1919
    </h3>
    <p>
      A letter dated January, 1918, written by Monsignor Darcy to Amory, who is
      a second lieutenant in the 171st Infantry, Port of Embarkation, Camp
      Mills, Long Island.
    </p>
    <p>
      MY DEAR BOY:
    </p>
    <p>
      All you need tell me of yourself is that you still are; for the rest I
      merely search back in a restive memory, a thermometer that records only
      fevers, and match you with what I was at your age. But men will chatter
      and you and I will still shout our futilities to each other across the
      stage until the last silly curtain falls <i>plump!</i> upon our bobbing
      heads. But you are starting the spluttering magic-lantern show of life
      with much the same array of slides as I had, so I need to write you if
      only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people....
    </p>
    <p>
      This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be
      quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have
      met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever
      grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the
      &ldquo;Agamemnon&rdquo; I find the only answer to this bitter age&mdash;all the world
      tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that
      hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as
      Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the
      hordes... hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt
      city... another blind blow at the race, furies that we passed with
      ovations years ago, over whose corpses we bleated triumphantly all through
      the Victorian era....
    </p>
    <p>
      And afterward an out-and-out materialistic world&mdash;and the Catholic
      Church. I wonder where you&rsquo;ll fit in. Of one thing I&rsquo;m sure&mdash;Celtic
      you&rsquo;ll live and Celtic you&rsquo;ll die; so if you don&rsquo;t use heaven as a
      continual referendum for your ideas you&rsquo;ll find earth a continual recall
      to your ambitions.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory, I&rsquo;ve discovered suddenly that I&rsquo;m an old man. Like all old men,
      I&rsquo;ve had dreams sometimes and I&rsquo;m going to tell you of them. I&rsquo;ve enjoyed
      imagining that you were my son, that perhaps when I was young I went into
      a state of coma and begat you, and when I came to, had no recollection of
      it... it&rsquo;s the paternal instinct, Amory&mdash;celibacy goes deeper than
      the flesh....
    </p>
    <p>
      Sometimes I think that the explanation of our deep resemblance is some
      common ancestor, and I find that the only blood that the Darcys and the
      O&rsquo;Haras have in common is that of the O&rsquo;Donahues... Stephen was his name,
      I think....
    </p>
    <p>
      When the lightning strikes one of us it strikes both: you had hardly
      arrived at the port of embarkation when I got my papers to start for Rome,
      and I am waiting every moment to be told where to take ship. Even before
      you get this letter I shall be on the ocean; then will come your turn. You
      went to war as a gentleman should, just as you went to school and college,
      because it was the thing to do. It&rsquo;s better to leave the blustering and
      tremulo-heroism to the middle classes; they do it so much better.
    </p>
    <p>
      Do you remember that week-end last March when you brought Burne Holiday
      from Princeton to see me? What a magnificent boy he is! It gave me a
      frightful shock afterward when you wrote that he thought me splendid; how
      could he be so deceived? Splendid is the one thing that neither you nor I
      are. We are many other things&mdash;we&rsquo;re extraordinary, we&rsquo;re clever, we
      could be said, I suppose, to be brilliant. We can attract people, we can
      make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties,
      we can almost always have our own way; but splendid&mdash;rather not!
    </p>
    <p>
      I am going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction
      that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be &ldquo;no small stir&rdquo; when
      I get there. How I wish you were with me! This sounds like a rather
      cynical paragraph, not at all the sort of thing that a middle-aged
      clergyman should write to a youth about to depart for the war; the only
      excuse is that the middle-aged clergyman is talking to himself. There are
      deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do. We have
      great faith, though yours at present is uncrystallized; we have a terrible
      honesty that all our sophistry cannot destroy and, above all, a childlike
      simplicity that keeps us from ever being really malicious.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have written a keen for you which follows. I am sorry your cheeks are
      not up to the description I have written of them, but you <i>will</i>
      smoke and read all night&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      At any rate here it is:
    </p>
    <p>
      A Lament for a Foster Son, and He going to the War Against the King of
      Foreign.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 &ldquo;Ochone
  He is gone from me the son of my mind
    And he in his golden youth like Angus Oge
  Angus of the bright birds
    And his mind strong and subtle like the mind of Cuchulin on
      Muirtheme.

  Awirra sthrue
  His brow is as white as the milk of the cows of Maeve
    And his cheeks like the cherries of the tree
  And it bending down to Mary and she feeding the Son of God.

  Aveelia Vrone
  His hair is like the golden collar of the Kings at Tara
    And his eyes like the four gray seas of Erin.
  And they swept with the mists of rain.

  Mavrone go Gudyo
  He to be in the joyful and red battle
    Amongst the chieftains and they doing great deeds of valor
  His life to go from him
    It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed.

  A Vich Deelish
  My heart is in the heart of my son
    And my life is in his life surely
  A man can be twice young
    In the life of his sons only.

  Jia du Vaha Alanav
  May the Son of God be above him and beneath him, before him and
      behind him
    May the King of the elements cast a mist over the eyes of the
      King of Foreign,
  May the Queen of the Graces lead him by the hand the way he can
      go through the midst of his enemies and they not seeing him

  May Patrick of the Gael and Collumb of the Churches and the five
      thousand Saints of Erin be better than a shield to him
  And he got into the fight.
    Och Ochone.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Amory&mdash;Amory&mdash;I feel, somehow, that this is all; one or both of
      us is not going to last out this war.... I&rsquo;ve been trying to tell you how
      much this reincarnation of myself in you has meant in the last few
      years... curiously alike we are... curiously unlike. Good-by, dear boy,
      and God be with you. THAYER DARCY.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      EMBARKING AT NIGHT
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric
      light. He searched in his pocket for note-book and pencil and then began
      to write, slowly, laboriously:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 &ldquo;We leave to-night...
    Silent, we filled the still, deserted street,
      A column of dim gray,
    And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat
      Along the moonless way;
    The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet
      That turned from night and day.

    And so we linger on the windless decks,
      See on the spectre shore
    Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks...
      Oh, shall we then deplore
    Those futile years!
                      See how the sea is white!
    The clouds have broken and the heavens burn
      To hollow highways, paved with gravelled light
    The churning of the waves about the stern
      Rises to one voluminous nocturne,
                         ... We leave to-night.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      A letter from Amory, headed &ldquo;Brest, March 11th, 1919,&rdquo; to Lieutenant T. P.
      D&rsquo;Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga.
    </p>
    <p>
      DEAR BAUDELAIRE:&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      We meet in Manhattan on the 30th of this very mo.; we then proceed to take
      a very sporty apartment, you and I and Alec, who is at me elbow as I
      write. I don&rsquo;t know what I&rsquo;m going to do but I have a vague dream of going
      into politics. Why is it that the pick of the young Englishmen from Oxford
      and Cambridge go into politics and in the U. S. A. we leave it to the
      muckers?&mdash;raised in the ward, educated in the assembly and sent to
      Congress, fat-paunched bundles of corruption, devoid of &ldquo;both ideas and
      ideals&rdquo; as the debaters used to say. Even forty years ago we had good men
      in politics, but we, we are brought up to pile up a million and &ldquo;show what
      we are made of.&rdquo; Sometimes I wish I&rsquo;d been an Englishman; American life is
      so damned dumb and stupid and healthy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Since poor Beatrice died I&rsquo;ll probably have a little money, but very darn
      little. I can forgive mother almost everything except the fact that in a
      sudden burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained
      to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments. Mr. Barton,
      my lawyer, writes me that my thousands are mostly in street railways and
      that the said Street R.R. s are losing money because of the five-cent
      fares. Imagine a salary list that gives $350 a month to a man that can&rsquo;t
      read and write!&mdash;yet I believe in it, even though I&rsquo;ve seen what was
      once a sizable fortune melt away between speculation, extravagance, the
      democratic administration, and the income tax&mdash;modern, that&rsquo;s me all
      over, Mabel.
    </p>
    <p>
      At any rate we&rsquo;ll have really knock-out rooms&mdash;you can get a job on
      some fashion magazine, and Alec can go into the Zinc Company or whatever
      it is that his people own&mdash;he&rsquo;s looking over my shoulder and he says
      it&rsquo;s a brass company, but I don&rsquo;t think it matters much, do you? There&rsquo;s
      probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money. As for
      the well-known Amory, he would write immortal literature if he were sure
      enough about anything to risk telling any one else about it. There is no
      more dangerous gift to posterity than a few cleverly turned platitudes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tom, why don&rsquo;t you become a Catholic? Of course to be a good one you&rsquo;d
      have to give up those violent intrigues you used to tell me about, but
      you&rsquo;d write better poetry if you were linked up to tall golden
      candlesticks and long, even chants, and even if the American priests are
      rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the
      sporty churches, and I&rsquo;ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a
      wonder.
    </p>
    <p>
      Kerry&rsquo;s death was a blow, so was Jesse&rsquo;s to a certain extent. And I have a
      great curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed
      Burne. Do you suppose he&rsquo;s in prison under some false name? I confess that
      the war instead of making me orthodox, which is the correct reaction, has
      made me a passionate agnostic. The Catholic Church has had its wings
      clipped so often lately that its part was timidly negligible, and they
      haven&rsquo;t any good writers any more. I&rsquo;m sick of Chesterton.
    </p>
    <p>
      I&rsquo;ve only discovered one soldier who passed through the much-advertised
      spiritual crisis, like this fellow, Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was
      already studying for the ministry, so he was ripe for it. I honestly think
      that&rsquo;s all pretty much rot, though it seemed to give sentimental comfort
      to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their
      children. This crisis-inspired religion is rather valueless and fleeting
      at best. I think four men have discovered Paris to one that discovered
      God.
    </p>
    <p>
      But us&mdash;you and me and Alec&mdash;oh, we&rsquo;ll get a Jap butler and
      dress for dinner and have wine on the table and lead a contemplative,
      emotionless life until we decide to use machine-guns with the property
      owners&mdash;or throw bombs with the Bolshevik God! Tom, I hope something
      happens. I&rsquo;m restless as the devil and have a horror of getting fat or
      falling in love and growing domestic.
    </p>
    <p>
      The place at Lake Geneva is now for rent but when I land I&rsquo;m going West to
      see Mr. Barton and get some details. Write me care of the Blackstone,
      Chicago.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
              S&rsquo;ever, dear Boswell,

                                  SAMUEL JOHNSON.
</pre>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0007" id="link2H_4_0007">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      BOOK TWO&mdash;The Education of a Personage
    </h2>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0005" id="link2HCH0005">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 1. The Debutante
    </h2>
    <p>
      The time is February. The place is a large, dainty bedroom in the Connage
      house on Sixty-eighth Street, New York. A girl&rsquo;s room: pink walls and
      curtains and a pink bedspread on a cream-colored bed. Pink and cream are
      the motifs of the room, but the only article of furniture in full view is
      a luxurious dressing-table with a glass top and a three-sided mirror. On
      the walls there is an expensive print of &ldquo;Cherry Ripe,&rdquo; a few polite dogs
      by Landseer, and the &ldquo;King of the Black Isles,&rdquo; by Maxfield Parrish.
    </p>
    <p>
      Great disorder consisting of the following items: (1) seven or eight empty
      cardboard boxes, with tissue-paper tongues hanging panting from their
      mouths; (2) an assortment of street dresses mingled with their sisters of
      the evening, all upon the table, all evidently new; (3) a roll of tulle,
      which has lost its dignity and wound itself tortuously around everything
      in sight, and (4) upon the two small chairs, a collection of lingerie that
      beggars description. One would enjoy seeing the bill called forth by the
      finery displayed and one is possessed by a desire to see the princess for
      whose benefit&mdash;Look! There&rsquo;s some one! Disappointment! This is only a
      maid hunting for something&mdash;she lifts a heap from a chair&mdash;Not
      there; another heap, the dressing-table, the chiffonier drawers. She
      brings to light several beautiful chemises and an amazing pajama but this
      does not satisfy her&mdash;she goes out.
    </p>
    <p>
      An indistinguishable mumble from the next room.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now, we are getting warm. This is Alec&rsquo;s mother, Mrs. Connage, ample,
      dignified, rouged to the dowager point and quite worn out. Her lips move
      significantly as she looks for IT. Her search is less thorough than the
      maid&rsquo;s but there is a touch of fury in it, that quite makes up for its
      sketchiness. She stumbles on the tulle and her &ldquo;damn&rdquo; is quite audible.
      She retires, empty-handed.
    </p>
    <p>
      More chatter outside and a girl&rsquo;s voice, a very spoiled voice, says: &ldquo;Of
      all the stupid people&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      After a pause a third seeker enters, not she of the spoiled voice, but a
      younger edition. This is Cecelia Connage, sixteen, pretty, shrewd, and
      constitutionally good-humored. She is dressed for the evening in a gown
      the obvious simplicity of which probably bores her. She goes to the
      nearest pile, selects a small pink garment and holds it up appraisingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Pink?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Outside) Yes!
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: <i>Very</i> snappy?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Yes!
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: I&rsquo;ve got it!
    </p>
    <p>
      (She sees herself in the mirror of the dressing-table and commences to
      shimmy enthusiastically.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Outside) What are you doing&mdash;trying it on?
    </p>
    <p>
      (CECELIA ceases and goes out carrying the garment at the right shoulder.
    </p>
    <p>
      From the other door, enters ALEC CONNAGE. He looks around quickly and in a
      huge voice shouts: Mama! There is a chorus of protest from next door and
      encouraged he starts toward it, but is repelled by another chorus.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: So <i>that&rsquo;s</i> where you all are! Amory Blaine is here.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: (Quickly) Take him down-stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Oh, he <i>is</i> down-stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Well, you can show him where his room is. Tell him I&rsquo;m sorry
      that I can&rsquo;t meet him now.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: He&rsquo;s heard a lot about you all. I wish you&rsquo;d hurry. Father&rsquo;s telling
      him all about the war and he&rsquo;s restless. He&rsquo;s sort of temperamental.
    </p>
    <p>
      (This last suffices to draw CECELIA into the room.)
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: (Seating herself high upon lingerie) How do you mean&mdash;temperamental?
      You used to say that about him in letters.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Oh, he writes stuff.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Does he play the piano?
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Don&rsquo;t think so.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: (Speculatively) Drink?
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Yes&mdash;nothing queer about him.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Money?
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Good Lord&mdash;ask him, he used to have a lot, and he&rsquo;s got some
      income now.
    </p>
    <p>
      (MRS. CONNAGE appears.)
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Alec, of course we&rsquo;re glad to have any friend of yours&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: You certainly ought to meet Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Of course, I want to. But I think it&rsquo;s so childish of you to
      leave a perfectly good home to go and live with two other boys in some
      impossible apartment. I hope it isn&rsquo;t in order that you can all drink as
      much as you want. (She pauses.) He&rsquo;ll be a little neglected to-night. This
      is Rosalind&rsquo;s week, you see. When a girl comes out, she needs <i>all</i>
      the attention.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Outside) Well, then, prove it by coming here and hooking me.
    </p>
    <p>
      (MRS. CONNAGE goes.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Rosalind hasn&rsquo;t changed a bit.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: (In a lower tone) She&rsquo;s awfully spoiled.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: She&rsquo;ll meet her match to-night.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Who&mdash;Mr. Amory Blaine?
    </p>
    <p>
      (ALEC nods.)
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Well, Rosalind has still to meet the man she can&rsquo;t outdistance.
      Honestly, Alec, she treats men terribly. She abuses them and cuts them and
      breaks dates with them and yawns in their faces&mdash;and they come back
      for more.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: They love it.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: They hate it. She&rsquo;s a&mdash;she&rsquo;s a sort of vampire, I think&mdash;and
      she can make girls do what she wants usually&mdash;only she hates girls.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Personality runs in our family.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: (Resignedly) I guess it ran out before it got to me.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Does Rosalind behave herself?
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Not particularly well. Oh, she&rsquo;s average&mdash;smokes sometimes,
      drinks punch, frequently kissed&mdash;Oh, yes&mdash;common knowledge&mdash;one
      of the effects of the war, you know.
    </p>
    <p>
      (Emerges MRS. CONNAGE.)
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Rosalind&rsquo;s almost finished so I can go down and meet your
      friend.
    </p>
    <p>
      (ALEC and his mother go out.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Outside) Oh, mother&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Mother&rsquo;s gone down.
    </p>
    <p>
      (And now ROSALIND enters. ROSALIND is&mdash;utterly ROSALIND. She is one
      of those girls who need never make the slightest effort to have men fall
      in love with them. Two types of men seldom do: dull men are usually afraid
      of her cleverness and intellectual men are usually afraid of her beauty.
      All others are hers by natural prerogative.
    </p>
    <p>
      If ROSALIND could be spoiled the process would have been complete by this
      time, and as a matter of fact, her disposition is not all it should be;
      she wants what she wants when she wants it and she is prone to make every
      one around her pretty miserable when she doesn&rsquo;t get it&mdash;but in the
      true sense she is not spoiled. Her fresh enthusiasm, her will to grow and
      learn, her endless faith in the inexhaustibility of romance, her courage
      and fundamental honesty&mdash;these things are not spoiled.
    </p>
    <p>
      There are long periods when she cordially loathes her whole family. She is
      quite unprincipled; her philosophy is carpe diem for herself and laissez
      faire for others. She loves shocking stories: she has that coarse streak
      that usually goes with natures that are both fine and big. She wants
      people to like her, but if they do not it never worries her or changes
      her. She is by no means a model character.
    </p>
    <p>
      The education of all beautiful women is the knowledge of men. ROSALIND had
      been disappointed in man after man as individuals, but she had great faith
      in man as a sex. Women she detested. They represented qualities that she
      felt and despised in herself&mdash;incipient meanness, conceit, cowardice,
      and petty dishonesty. She once told a roomful of her mother&rsquo;s friends that
      the only excuse for women was the necessity for a disturbing element among
      men. She danced exceptionally well, drew cleverly but hastily, and had a
      startling facility with words, which she used only in love-letters.
    </p>
    <p>
      But all criticism of ROSALIND ends in her beauty. There was that shade of
      glorious yellow hair, the desire to imitate which supports the dye
      industry. There was the eternal kissable mouth, small, slightly sensual,
      and utterly disturbing. There were gray eyes and an unimpeachable skin
      with two spots of vanishing color. She was slender and athletic, without
      underdevelopment, and it was a delight to watch her move about a room,
      walk along a street, swing a golf club, or turn a &ldquo;cartwheel.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A last qualification&mdash;her vivid, instant personality escaped that
      conscious, theatrical quality that AMORY had found in ISABELLE. MONSIGNOR
      DARCY would have been quite up a tree whether to call her a personality or
      a personage. She was perhaps the delicious, inexpressible,
      once-in-a-century blend.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the night of her debut she is, for all her strange, stray wisdom, quite
      like a happy little girl. Her mother&rsquo;s maid has just done her hair, but
      she has decided impatiently that she can do a better job herself. She is
      too nervous just now to stay in one place. To that we owe her presence in
      this littered room. She is going to speak. ISABELLE&rsquo;S alto tones had been
      like a violin, but if you could hear ROSALIND, you would say her voice was
      musical as a waterfall.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Honestly, there are only two costumes in the world that I really
      enjoy being in&mdash;(Combing her hair at the dressing-table.) One&rsquo;s a
      hoop skirt with pantaloons; the other&rsquo;s a one-piece bathing-suit. I&rsquo;m
      quite charming in both of them.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Glad you&rsquo;re coming out?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Yes; aren&rsquo;t you?
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: (Cynically) You&rsquo;re glad so you can get married and live on Long
      Island with the <i>fast younger married set</i>. You want life to be a
      chain of flirtation with a man for every link.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: <i>Want</i> it to be one! You mean I&rsquo;ve <i>found</i> it one.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Ha!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Cecelia, darling, you don&rsquo;t know what a trial it is to be&mdash;like
      me. I&rsquo;ve got to keep my face like steel in the street to keep men from
      winking at me. If I laugh hard from a front row in the theatre, the
      comedian plays to me for the rest of the evening. If I drop my voice, my
      eyes, my handkerchief at a dance, my partner calls me up on the &lsquo;phone
      every day for a week.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: It must be an awful strain.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: The unfortunate part is that the only men who interest me at all
      are the totally ineligible ones. Now&mdash;if I were poor I&rsquo;d go on the
      stage.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Yes, you might as well get paid for the amount of acting you do.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Sometimes when I&rsquo;ve felt particularly radiant I&rsquo;ve thought, why
      should this be wasted on one man?
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Often when you&rsquo;re particularly sulky, I&rsquo;ve wondered why it should
      all be wasted on just one family. (Getting up.) I think I&rsquo;ll go down and
      meet Mr. Amory Blaine. I like temperamental men.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: There aren&rsquo;t any. Men don&rsquo;t know how to be really angry or
      really happy&mdash;and the ones that do, go to pieces.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Well, I&rsquo;m glad I don&rsquo;t have all your worries. I&rsquo;m engaged.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (With a scornful smile) Engaged? Why, you little lunatic! If
      mother heard you talking like that she&rsquo;d send you off to boarding-school,
      where you belong.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: You won&rsquo;t tell her, though, because I know things I could tell&mdash;and
      you&rsquo;re too selfish!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (A little annoyed) Run along, little girl! Who are you engaged
      to, the iceman? the man that keeps the candy-store?
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Cheap wit&mdash;good-by, darling, I&rsquo;ll see you later.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, be <i>sure</i> and do that&mdash;you&rsquo;re such a help.
    </p>
    <p>
      (Exit CECELIA. ROSALIND finished her hair and rises, humming. She goes up
      to the mirror and starts to dance in front of it on the soft carpet. She
      watches not her feet, but her eyes&mdash;never casually but always
      intently, even when she smiles. The door suddenly opens and then slams
      behind AMORY, very cool and handsome as usual. He melts into instant
      confusion.)
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Oh, I&rsquo;m sorry. I thought&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Smiling radiantly) Oh, you&rsquo;re Amory Blaine, aren&rsquo;t you?
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Regarding her closely) And you&rsquo;re Rosalind?
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: I&rsquo;m going to call you Amory&mdash;oh, come in&mdash;it&rsquo;s all right&mdash;mother&rsquo;ll
      be right in&mdash;(under her breath) unfortunately.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Gazing around) This is sort of a new wrinkle for me.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: This is No Man&rsquo;s Land.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: This is where you&mdash;you&mdash;(pause)
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Yes&mdash;all those things. (She crosses to the bureau.) See, here&rsquo;s
      my rouge&mdash;eye pencils.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: I didn&rsquo;t know you were that way.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: What did you expect?
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: I thought you&rsquo;d be sort of&mdash;sort of&mdash;sexless, you know, swim
      and play golf.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Oh, I do&mdash;but not in business hours.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Business?
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Six to two&mdash;strictly.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: I&rsquo;d like to have some stock in the corporation.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Oh, it&rsquo;s not a corporation&mdash;it&rsquo;s just &ldquo;Rosalind, Unlimited.&rdquo;
       Fifty-one shares, name, good-will, and everything goes at $25,000 a year.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Disapprovingly) Sort of a chilly proposition.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Well, Amory, you don&rsquo;t mind&mdash;do you? When I meet a man that
      doesn&rsquo;t bore me to death after two weeks, perhaps it&rsquo;ll be different.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Odd, you have the same point of view on men that I have on women.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: I&rsquo;m not really feminine, you know&mdash;in my mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Interested) Go on.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: No, you&mdash;you go on&mdash;you&rsquo;ve made me talk about myself.
      That&rsquo;s against the rules.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Rules?
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: My own rules&mdash;but you&mdash;Oh, Amory, I hear you&rsquo;re brilliant.
      The family expects <i>so</i> much of you.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: How encouraging!
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Alec said you&rsquo;d taught him to think. Did you? I didn&rsquo;t believe any
      one could.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: No. I&rsquo;m really quite dull.
    </p>
    <p>
      (He evidently doesn&rsquo;t intend this to be taken seriously.)
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Liar.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: I&rsquo;m&mdash;I&rsquo;m religious&mdash;I&rsquo;m literary. I&rsquo;ve&mdash;I&rsquo;ve even
      written poems.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Vers libre&mdash;splendid! (She declaims.)
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;The trees are green,
    The birds are singing in the trees,
    The girl sips her poison
    The bird flies away the girl dies.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      HE: (Laughing) No, not that kind.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Suddenly) I like you.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Don&rsquo;t.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Modest too&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: I&rsquo;m afraid of you. I&rsquo;m always afraid of a girl&mdash;until I&rsquo;ve kissed
      her.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Emphatically) My dear boy, the war is over.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: So I&rsquo;ll always be afraid of you.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Rather sadly) I suppose you will.
    </p>
    <p>
      (A slight hesitation on both their parts.)
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (After due consideration) Listen. This is a frightful thing to ask.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Knowing what&rsquo;s coming) After five minutes.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: But will you&mdash;kiss me? Or are you afraid?
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: I&rsquo;m never afraid&mdash;but your reasons are so poor.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Rosalind, I really <i>want</i> to kiss you.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: So do I.
    </p>
    <p>
      (They kiss&mdash;definitely and thoroughly.)
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (After a breathless second) Well, is your curiosity satisfied?
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Is yours?
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: No, it&rsquo;s only aroused.
    </p>
    <p>
      (He looks it.)
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Dreamily) I&rsquo;ve kissed dozens of men. I suppose I&rsquo;ll kiss dozens
      more.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Abstractedly) Yes, I suppose you could&mdash;like that.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Most people like the way I kiss.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Remembering himself) Good Lord, yes. Kiss me once more, Rosalind.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: No&mdash;my curiosity is generally satisfied at one.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Discouraged) Is that a rule?
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: I make rules to fit the cases.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: You and I are somewhat alike&mdash;except that I&rsquo;m years older in
      experience.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: How old are you?
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Almost twenty-three. You?
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Nineteen&mdash;just.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: I suppose you&rsquo;re the product of a fashionable school.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: No&mdash;I&rsquo;m fairly raw material. I was expelled from Spence&mdash;I&rsquo;ve
      forgotten why.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: What&rsquo;s your general trend?
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Oh, I&rsquo;m bright, quite selfish, emotional when aroused, fond of
      admiration&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Suddenly) I don&rsquo;t want to fall in love with you&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Raising her eyebrows) Nobody asked you to.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Continuing coldly) But I probably will. I love your mouth.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Hush! Please don&rsquo;t fall in love with my mouth&mdash;hair, eyes,
      shoulders, slippers&mdash;but <i>not</i> my mouth. Everybody falls in love
      with my mouth.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: It&rsquo;s quite beautiful.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: It&rsquo;s too small.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: No it isn&rsquo;t&mdash;let&rsquo;s see.
    </p>
    <p>
      (He kisses her again with the same thoroughness.)
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Rather moved) Say something sweet.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Frightened) Lord help me.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Drawing away) Well, don&rsquo;t&mdash;if it&rsquo;s so hard.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Shall we pretend? So soon?
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: We haven&rsquo;t the same standards of time as other people.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Already it&rsquo;s&mdash;other people.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Let&rsquo;s pretend.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: No&mdash;I can&rsquo;t&mdash;it&rsquo;s sentiment.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: You&rsquo;re not sentimental?
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: No, I&rsquo;m romantic&mdash;a sentimental person thinks things will last&mdash;a
      romantic person hopes against hope that they won&rsquo;t. Sentiment is
      emotional.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: And you&rsquo;re not? (With her eyes half-closed.) You probably flatter
      yourself that that&rsquo;s a superior attitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: Well&mdash;Rosalind, Rosalind, don&rsquo;t argue&mdash;kiss me again.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Quite chilly now) No&mdash;I have no desire to kiss you.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: (Openly taken aback) You wanted to kiss me a minute ago.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: This is now.
    </p>
    <p>
      HE: I&rsquo;d better go.
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: I suppose so.
    </p>
    <p>
      (He goes toward the door.)
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: Oh!
    </p>
    <p>
      (He turns.)
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Laughing) Score&mdash;Home Team: One hundred&mdash;Opponents: Zero.
    </p>
    <p>
      (He starts back.)
    </p>
    <p>
      SHE: (Quickly) Rain&mdash;no game.
    </p>
    <p>
      (He goes out.)
    </p>
    <p>
      (She goes quietly to the chiffonier, takes out a cigarette-case and hides
      it in the side drawer of a desk. Her mother enters, note-book in hand.)
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Good&mdash;I&rsquo;ve been wanting to speak to you alone before we
      go down-stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Heavens! you frighten me!
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Rosalind, you&rsquo;ve been a very expensive proposition.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Resignedly) Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: And you know your father hasn&rsquo;t what he once had.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Making a wry face) Oh, please don&rsquo;t talk about money.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: You can&rsquo;t do anything without it. This is our last year in
      this house&mdash;and unless things change Cecelia won&rsquo;t have the
      advantages you&rsquo;ve had.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Impatiently) Well&mdash;what is it?
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: So I ask you to please mind me in several things I&rsquo;ve put
      down in my note-book. The first one is: don&rsquo;t disappear with young men.
      There may be a time when it&rsquo;s valuable, but at present I want you on the
      dance-floor where I can find you. There are certain men I want to have you
      meet and I don&rsquo;t like finding you in some corner of the conservatory
      exchanging silliness with any one&mdash;or listening to it.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Sarcastically) Yes, listening to it <i>is</i> better.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: And don&rsquo;t waste a lot of time with the college set&mdash;little
      boys nineteen and twenty years old. I don&rsquo;t mind a prom or a football
      game, but staying away from advantageous parties to eat in little cafes
      down-town with Tom, Dick, and Harry&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Offering her code, which is, in its way, quite as high as her
      mother&rsquo;s) Mother, it&rsquo;s done&mdash;you can&rsquo;t run everything now the way you
      did in the early nineties.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: (Paying no attention) There are several bachelor friends of
      your father&rsquo;s that I want you to meet to-night&mdash;youngish men.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Nodding wisely) About forty-five?
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: (Sharply) Why not?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, <i>quite</i> all right&mdash;they know life and are so
      adorably tired looking (shakes her head)&mdash;but they <i>will</i> dance.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: I haven&rsquo;t met Mr. Blaine&mdash;but I don&rsquo;t think you&rsquo;ll care
      for him. He doesn&rsquo;t sound like a money-maker.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Mother, I never <i>think</i> about money.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: You never keep it long enough to think about it.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Sighs) Yes, I suppose some day I&rsquo;ll marry a ton of it&mdash;out
      of sheer boredom.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: (Referring to note-book) I had a wire from Hartford. Dawson
      Ryder is coming up. Now there&rsquo;s a young man I like, and he&rsquo;s floating in
      money. It seems to me that since you seem tired of Howard Gillespie you
      might give Mr. Ryder some encouragement. This is the third time he&rsquo;s been
      up in a month.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: How did you know I was tired of Howard Gillespie?
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: The poor boy looks so miserable every time he comes.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: That was one of those romantic, pre-battle affairs. They&rsquo;re all
      wrong.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: (Her say said) At any rate, make us proud of you to-night.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Don&rsquo;t you think I&rsquo;m beautiful?
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: You know you are.
    </p>
    <p>
      (From down-stairs is heard the moan of a violin being tuned, the roll of a
      drum. MRS. CONNAGE turns quickly to her daughter.)
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Come!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: One minute!
    </p>
    <p>
      (Her mother leaves. ROSALIND goes to the glass where she gazes at herself
      with great satisfaction. She kisses her hand and touches her mirrored
      mouth with it. Then she turns out the lights and leaves the room. Silence
      for a moment. A few chords from the piano, the discreet patter of faint
      drums, the rustle of new silk, all blend on the staircase outside and
      drift in through the partly opened door. Bundled figures pass in the
      lighted hall. The laughter heard below becomes doubled and multiplied.
      Then some one comes in, closes the door, and switches on the lights. It is
      CECELIA. She goes to the chiffonier, looks in the drawers, hesitates&mdash;then
      to the desk whence she takes the cigarette-case and extracts one. She
      lights it and then, puffing and blowing, walks toward the mirror.)
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: (In tremendously sophisticated accents) Oh, yes, coming out is <i>such</i>
      a farce nowadays, you know. One really plays around so much before one is
      seventeen, that it&rsquo;s positively anticlimax. (Shaking hands with a
      visionary middle-aged nobleman.) Yes, your grace&mdash;I b&rsquo;lieve I&rsquo;ve
      heard my sister speak of you. Have a puff&mdash;they&rsquo;re very good. They&rsquo;re&mdash;they&rsquo;re
      Coronas. You don&rsquo;t smoke? What a pity! The king doesn&rsquo;t allow it, I
      suppose. Yes, I&rsquo;ll dance.
    </p>
    <p>
      (So she dances around the room to a tune from down-stairs, her arms
      outstretched to an imaginary partner, the cigarette waving in her hand.)
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      SEVERAL HOURS LATER
    </p>
    <p>
      The corner of a den down-stairs, filled by a very comfortable leather
      lounge. A small light is on each side above, and in the middle, over the
      couch hangs a painting of a very old, very dignified gentleman, period
      1860. Outside the music is heard in a fox-trot.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND is seated on the lounge and on her left is HOWARD GILLESPIE, a
      vapid youth of about twenty-four. He is obviously very unhappy, and she is
      quite bored.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: (Feebly) What do you mean I&rsquo;ve changed. I feel the same toward
      you.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: But you don&rsquo;t look the same to me.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: Three weeks ago you used to say that you liked me because I was
      so blasé, so indifferent&mdash;I still am.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: But not about me. I used to like you because you had brown eyes
      and thin legs.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: (Helplessly) They&rsquo;re still thin and brown. You&rsquo;re a vampire,
      that&rsquo;s all.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: The only thing I know about vamping is what&rsquo;s on the piano
      score. What confuses men is that I&rsquo;m perfectly natural. I used to think
      you were never jealous. Now you follow me with your eyes wherever I go.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: I love you.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Coldly) I know it.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: And you haven&rsquo;t kissed me for two weeks. I had an idea that
      after a girl was kissed she was&mdash;was&mdash;won.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Those days are over. I have to be won all over again every time
      you see me.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: Are you serious?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: About as usual. There used to be two kinds of kisses: First when
      girls were kissed and deserted; second, when they were engaged. Now
      there&rsquo;s a third kind, where the man is kissed and deserted. If Mr. Jones
      of the nineties bragged he&rsquo;d kissed a girl, every one knew he was through
      with her. If Mr. Jones of 1919 brags the same every one knows it&rsquo;s because
      he can&rsquo;t kiss her any more. Given a decent start any girl can beat a man
      nowadays.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: Then why do you play with men?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Leaning forward confidentially) For that first moment, when
      he&rsquo;s interested. There is a moment&mdash;Oh, just before the first kiss, a
      whispered word&mdash;something that makes it worth while.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: And then?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Then after that you make him talk about himself. Pretty soon he
      thinks of nothing but being alone with you&mdash;he sulks, he won&rsquo;t fight,
      he doesn&rsquo;t want to play&mdash;Victory!
    </p>
    <p>
      (Enter DAWSON RYDER, twenty-six, handsome, wealthy, faithful to his own, a
      bore perhaps, but steady and sure of success.)
    </p>
    <p>
      RYDER: I believe this is my dance, Rosalind.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Well, Dawson, so you recognize me. Now I know I haven&rsquo;t got too
      much paint on. Mr. Ryder, this is Mr. Gillespie.
    </p>
    <p>
      (They shake hands and GILLESPIE leaves, tremendously downcast.)
    </p>
    <p>
      RYDER: Your party is certainly a success.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Is it&mdash;I haven&rsquo;t seen it lately. I&rsquo;m weary&mdash;Do you
      mind sitting out a minute?
    </p>
    <p>
      RYDER: Mind&mdash;I&rsquo;m delighted. You know I loathe this &ldquo;rushing" idea.
      See a girl yesterday, to-day, to-morrow.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Dawson!
    </p>
    <p>
      RYDER: What?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I wonder if you know you love me.
    </p>
    <p>
      RYDER: (Startled) What&mdash;Oh&mdash;you know you&rsquo;re remarkable!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Because you know I&rsquo;m an awful proposition. Any one who marries
      me will have his hands full. I&rsquo;m mean&mdash;mighty mean.
    </p>
    <p>
      RYDER: Oh, I wouldn&rsquo;t say that.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, yes, I am&mdash;especially to the people nearest to me. (She
      rises.) Come, let&rsquo;s go. I&rsquo;ve changed my mind and I want to dance. Mother
      is probably having a fit.
    </p>
    <p>
      (Exeunt. Enter ALEC and CECELIA.)
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Just my luck to get my own brother for an intermission.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: (Gloomily) I&rsquo;ll go if you want me to.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Good heavens, no&mdash;with whom would I begin the next dance?
      (Sighs.) There&rsquo;s no color in a dance since the French officers went back.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: (Thoughtfully) I don&rsquo;t want Amory to fall in love with Rosalind.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: Why, I had an idea that that was just what you did want.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: I did, but since seeing these girls&mdash;I don&rsquo;t know. I&rsquo;m awfully
      attached to Amory. He&rsquo;s sensitive and I don&rsquo;t want him to break his heart
      over somebody who doesn&rsquo;t care about him.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: He&rsquo;s very good looking.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: (Still thoughtfully) She won&rsquo;t marry him, but a girl doesn&rsquo;t have to
      marry a man to break his heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: What does it? I wish I knew the secret.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Why, you cold-blooded little kitty. It&rsquo;s lucky for some that the
      Lord gave you a pug nose.
    </p>
    <p>
      (Enter MRS. CONNAGE.)
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Where on earth is Rosalind?
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: (Brilliantly) Of course you&rsquo;ve come to the best people to find out.
      She&rsquo;d naturally be with us.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Her father has marshalled eight bachelor millionaires to
      meet her.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: You might form a squad and march through the halls.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: I&rsquo;m perfectly serious&mdash;for all I know she may be at the
      Cocoanut Grove with some football player on the night of her debut. You
      look left and I&rsquo;ll&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: (Flippantly) Hadn&rsquo;t you better send the butler through the cellar?
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: (Perfectly serious) Oh, you don&rsquo;t think she&rsquo;d be there?
    </p>
    <p>
      CECELIA: He&rsquo;s only joking, mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Mother had a picture of her tapping a keg of beer with some high
      hurdler.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Let&rsquo;s look right away.
    </p>
    <p>
      (They go out. ROSALIND comes in with GILLESPIE.)
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: Rosalind&mdash;Once more I ask you. Don&rsquo;t you care a blessed
      thing about me?
    </p>
    <p>
      (AMORY walks in briskly.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: My dance.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Mr. Gillespie, this is Mr. Blaine.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: I&rsquo;ve met Mr. Blaine. From Lake Geneva, aren&rsquo;t you?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: (Desperately) I&rsquo;ve been there. It&rsquo;s in the&mdash;the Middle
      West, isn&rsquo;t it?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (Spicily) Approximately. But I always felt that I&rsquo;d rather be
      provincial hot-tamale than soup without seasoning.
    </p>
    <p>
      GILLESPIE: What!
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Oh, no offense.
    </p>
    <p>
      (GILLESPIE bows and leaves.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: He&rsquo;s too much <i>people</i>.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: I was in love with a <i>people</i> once.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: So?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Oh, yes&mdash;her name was Isabelle&mdash;nothing at all to her
      except what I read into her.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: What happened?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Finally I convinced her that she was smarter than I was&mdash;then
      she threw me over. Said I was critical and impractical, you know.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: What do you mean impractical?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Oh&mdash;drive a car, but can&rsquo;t change a tire.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: What are you going to do?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Can&rsquo;t say&mdash;run for President, write&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Greenwich Village?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Good heavens, no&mdash;I said write&mdash;not drink.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I like business men. Clever men are usually so homely.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: I feel as if I&rsquo;d known you for ages.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, are you going to commence the &ldquo;pyramid&rdquo; story?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: No&mdash;I was going to make it French. I was Louis XIV and you
      were one of my&mdash;my&mdash;(Changing his tone.) Suppose&mdash;we fell
      in love.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I&rsquo;ve suggested pretending.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: If we did it would be very big.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Why?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Because selfish people are in a way terribly capable of great
      loves.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Turning her lips up) Pretend.
    </p>
    <p>
      (Very deliberately they kiss.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: I can&rsquo;t say sweet things. But you <i>are</i> beautiful.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Not that.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: What then?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Sadly) Oh, nothing&mdash;only I want sentiment, real sentiment&mdash;and
      I never find it.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: I never find anything else in the world&mdash;and I loathe it.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: It&rsquo;s so hard to find a male to gratify one&rsquo;s artistic taste.
    </p>
    <p>
      (Some one has opened a door and the music of a waltz surges into the room.
      ROSALIND rises.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Listen! they&rsquo;re playing &ldquo;Kiss Me Again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      (He looks at her.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Well?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Well?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (Softly&mdash;the battle lost) I love you.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I love you&mdash;now.
    </p>
    <p>
      (They kiss.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Oh, God, what have I done?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Nothing. Oh, don&rsquo;t talk. Kiss me again.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: I don&rsquo;t know why or how, but I love you&mdash;from the moment I saw
      you.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Me too&mdash;I&mdash;I&mdash;oh, to-night&rsquo;s to-night.
    </p>
    <p>
      (Her brother strolls in, starts and then in a loud voice says: &ldquo;Oh, excuse
      me,&rdquo; and goes.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Her lips scarcely stirring) Don&rsquo;t let me go&mdash;I don&rsquo;t care
      who knows what I do.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Say it!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I love you&mdash;now. (They part.) Oh&mdash;I am very youthful,
      thank God&mdash;and rather beautiful, thank God&mdash;and happy, thank
      God, thank God&mdash;(She pauses and then, in an odd burst of prophecy,
      adds) Poor Amory!
    </p>
    <p>
      (He kisses her again.)
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      KISMET
    </p>
    <p>
      Within two weeks Amory and Rosalind were deeply and passionately in love.
      The critical qualities which had spoiled for each of them a dozen romances
      were dulled by the great wave of emotion that washed over them.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It may be an insane love-affair,&rdquo; she told her anxious mother, &ldquo;but it&rsquo;s
      not inane.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The wave swept Amory into an advertising agency early in March, where he
      alternated between astonishing bursts of rather exceptional work and wild
      dreams of becoming suddenly rich and touring Italy with Rosalind.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were together constantly, for lunch, for dinner, and nearly every
      evening&mdash;always in a sort of breathless hush, as if they feared that
      any minute the spell would break and drop them out of this paradise of
      rose and flame. But the spell became a trance, seemed to increase from day
      to day; they began to talk of marrying in July&mdash;in June. All life was
      transmitted into terms of their love, all experience, all desires, all
      ambitions, were nullified&mdash;their senses of humor crawled into corners
      to sleep; their former love-affairs seemed faintly laughable and scarcely
      regretted juvenalia.
    </p>
    <p>
      For the second time in his life Amory had had a complete bouleversement
      and was hurrying into line with his generation.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      A LITTLE INTERLUDE
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory wandered slowly up the avenue and thought of the night as inevitably
      his&mdash;the pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets ... it
      seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped
      into the sensuous vibrant walks of life. Everywhere these countless
      lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing&mdash;he moved in a
      half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying
      toward him with eager feet from every corner.... How the unforgettable
      faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand
      overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more
      drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his. Even his dreams
      now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air.
    </p>
    <p>
      The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom&rsquo;s cigarette
      where he lounged by the open window. As the door shut behind him, Amory
      stood a moment with his back against it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello, Benvenuto Blaine. How went the advertising business to-day?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory sprawled on a couch.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I loathed it as usual!&rdquo; The momentary vision of the bustling agency was
      displaced quickly by another picture.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My God! She&rsquo;s wonderful!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom sighed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t tell you,&rdquo; repeated Amory, &ldquo;just how wonderful she is. I don&rsquo;t
      want you to know. I don&rsquo;t want any one to know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Another sigh came from the window&mdash;quite a resigned sigh.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She&rsquo;s life and hope and happiness, my whole world now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He felt the quiver of a tear on his eyelid.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, <i>Golly</i>, Tom!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      BITTER SWEET
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sit like we do,&rdquo; she whispered.
    </p>
    <p>
      He sat in the big chair and held out his arms so that she could nestle
      inside them.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I knew you&rsquo;d come to-night,&rdquo; she said softly, &ldquo;like summer, just when I
      needed you most... darling... darling...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His lips moved lazily over her face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You <i>taste</i> so good,&rdquo; he sighed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do you mean, lover?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, just sweet, just sweet...&rdquo; he held her closer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory,&rdquo; she whispered, &ldquo;when you&rsquo;re ready for me I&rsquo;ll marry you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We won&rsquo;t have much at first.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t!&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;It hurts when you reproach yourself for what you
      can&rsquo;t give me. I&rsquo;ve got your precious self&mdash;and that&rsquo;s enough for
      me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know, don&rsquo;t you? Oh, you know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but I want to hear you say it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I love you, Amory, with all my heart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Always, will you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All my life&mdash;Oh, Amory&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to belong to you. I want your people to be my people. I want to
      have your babies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I haven&rsquo;t any people.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t laugh at me, Amory. Just kiss me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll do what you want,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I&rsquo;ll do what <i>you</i> want. We&rsquo;re <i>you</i>&mdash;not me. Oh,
      you&rsquo;re so much a part, so much all of me...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He closed his eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m so happy that I&rsquo;m frightened. Wouldn&rsquo;t it be awful if this was&mdash;was
      the high point?...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked at him dreamily.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Beauty and love pass, I know.... Oh, there&rsquo;s sadness, too. I suppose all
      great happiness is a little sad. Beauty means the scent of roses and then
      the death of roses&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Beauty means the agony of sacrifice and the end of agony....&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And, Amory, we&rsquo;re beautiful, I know. I&rsquo;m sure God loves us&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He loves you. You&rsquo;re his most precious possession.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not his, I&rsquo;m yours. Amory, I belong to you. For the first time I
      regret all the other kisses; now I know how much a kiss can mean.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then they would smoke and he would tell her about his day at the office&mdash;and
      where they might live. Sometimes, when he was particularly loquacious, she
      went to sleep in his arms, but he loved that Rosalind&mdash;all Rosalinds&mdash;as
      he had never in the world loved any one else. Intangibly fleeting,
      unrememberable hours.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      AQUATIC INCIDENT
    </p>
    <p>
      One day Amory and Howard Gillespie meeting by accident down-town took
      lunch together, and Amory heard a story that delighted him. Gillespie
      after several cocktails was in a talkative mood; he began by telling Amory
      that he was sure Rosalind was slightly eccentric.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had gone with her on a swimming party up in Westchester County, and
      some one mentioned that Annette Kellerman had been there one day on a
      visit and had dived from the top of a rickety, thirty-foot summer-house.
      Immediately Rosalind insisted that Howard should climb up with her to see
      what it looked like.
    </p>
    <p>
      A minute later, as he sat and dangled his feet on the edge, a form shot by
      him; Rosalind, her arms spread in a beautiful swan dive, had sailed
      through the air into the clear water.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course <i>I</i> had to go, after that&mdash;and I nearly killed
      myself. I thought I was pretty good to even try it. Nobody else in the
      party tried it. Well, afterward Rosalind had the nerve to ask me why I
      stooped over when I dove. &lsquo;It didn&rsquo;t make it any easier,&rsquo; she said, &lsquo;it
      just took all the courage out of it.&rsquo; I ask you, what can a man do with a
      girl like that? Unnecessary, I call it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Gillespie failed to understand why Amory was smiling delightedly all
      through lunch. He thought perhaps he was one of these hollow optimists.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      FIVE WEEKS LATER
    </p>
    <p>
      Again the library of the Connage house. ROSALIND is alone, sitting on the
      lounge staring very moodily and unhappily at nothing. She has changed
      perceptibly&mdash;she is a trifle thinner for one thing; the light in her
      eyes is not so bright; she looks easily a year older.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her mother comes in, muffled in an opera-cloak. She takes in ROSALIND with
      a nervous glance.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Who is coming to-night?
    </p>
    <p>
      (ROSALIND fails to hear her, at least takes no notice.)
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Alec is coming up to take me to this Barrie play, &ldquo;Et tu,
      Brutus.&rdquo; (She perceives that she is talking to herself.) Rosalind! I asked
      you who is coming to-night?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Starting) Oh&mdash;what&mdash;oh&mdash;Amory&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: (Sarcastically) You have so <i>many</i> admirers lately that
      I couldn&rsquo;t imagine <i>which</i> one. (ROSALIND doesn&rsquo;t answer.) Dawson
      Ryder is more patient than I thought he&rsquo;d be. You haven&rsquo;t given him an
      evening this week.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (With a very weary expression that is quite new to her face.)
      Mother&mdash;please&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Oh, <i>I</i> won&rsquo;t interfere. You&rsquo;ve already wasted over two
      months on a theoretical genius who hasn&rsquo;t a penny to his name, but <i>go</i>
      ahead, waste your life on him. <i>I</i> won&rsquo;t interfere.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (As if repeating a tiresome lesson) You know he has a little
      income&mdash;and you know he&rsquo;s earning thirty-five dollars a week in
      advertising&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: And it wouldn&rsquo;t buy your clothes. (She pauses but ROSALIND
      makes no reply.) I have your best interests at heart when I tell you not
      to take a step you&rsquo;ll spend your days regretting. It&rsquo;s not as if your
      father could help you. Things have been hard for him lately and he&rsquo;s an
      old man. You&rsquo;d be dependent absolutely on a dreamer, a nice, well-born
      boy, but a dreamer&mdash;merely <i>clever</i>. (She implies that this
      quality in itself is rather vicious.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: For heaven&rsquo;s sake, mother&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      (A maid appears, announces Mr. Blaine who follows immediately. AMORY&rsquo;S
      friends have been telling him for ten days that he &ldquo;looks like the wrath
      of God,&rdquo; and he does. As a matter of fact he has not been able to eat a
      mouthful in the last thirty-six hours.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Good evening, Mrs. Connage.
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: (Not unkindly) Good evening, Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      (AMORY and ROSALIND exchange glances&mdash;and ALEC comes in. ALEC&rsquo;S
      attitude throughout has been neutral. He believes in his heart that the
      marriage would make AMORY mediocre and ROSALIND miserable, but he feels a
      great sympathy for both of them.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Hi, Amory!
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Hi, Alec! Tom said he&rsquo;d meet you at the theatre.
    </p>
    <p>
      ALEC: Yeah, just saw him. How&rsquo;s the advertising to-day? Write some
      brilliant copy?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Oh, it&rsquo;s about the same. I got a raise&mdash;(Every one looks at
      him rather eagerly)&mdash;of two dollars a week. (General collapse.)
    </p>
    <p>
      MRS. CONNAGE: Come, Alec, I hear the car.
    </p>
    <p>
      (A good night, rather chilly in sections. After MRS. CONNAGE and ALEC go
      out there is a pause. ROSALIND still stares moodily at the fireplace.
      AMORY goes to her and puts his arm around her.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Darling girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      (They kiss. Another pause and then she seizes his hand, covers it with
      kisses and holds it to her breast.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Sadly) I love your hands, more than anything. I see them often
      when you&rsquo;re away from me&mdash;so tired; I know every line of them. Dear
      hands!
    </p>
    <p>
      (Their eyes meet for a second and then she begins to cry&mdash;a tearless
      sobbing.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Rosalind!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, we&rsquo;re so darned pitiful!
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Rosalind!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, I want to die!
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Rosalind, another night of this and I&rsquo;ll go to pieces. You&rsquo;ve been
      this way four days now. You&rsquo;ve got to be more encouraging or I can&rsquo;t work
      or eat or sleep. (He looks around helplessly as if searching for new words
      to clothe an old, shopworn phrase.) We&rsquo;ll have to make a start. I like
      having to make a start together. (His forced hopefulness fades as he sees
      her unresponsive.) What&rsquo;s the matter? (He gets up suddenly and starts to
      pace the floor.) It&rsquo;s Dawson Ryder, that&rsquo;s what it is. He&rsquo;s been working
      on your nerves. You&rsquo;ve been with him every afternoon for a week. People
      come and tell me they&rsquo;ve seen you together, and I have to smile and nod
      and pretend it hasn&rsquo;t the slightest significance for me. And you won&rsquo;t
      tell me anything as it develops.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Amory, if you don&rsquo;t sit down I&rsquo;ll scream.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (Sitting down suddenly beside her) Oh, Lord.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Taking his hand gently) You know I love you, don&rsquo;t you?
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: You know I&rsquo;ll always love you&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Don&rsquo;t talk that way; you frighten me. It sounds as if we weren&rsquo;t
      going to have each other. (She cries a little and rising from the couch
      goes to the armchair.) I&rsquo;ve felt all afternoon that things were worse. I
      nearly went wild down at the office&mdash;couldn&rsquo;t write a line. Tell me
      everything.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: There&rsquo;s nothing to tell, I say. I&rsquo;m just nervous.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Rosalind, you&rsquo;re playing with the idea of marrying Dawson Ryder.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (After a pause) He&rsquo;s been asking me to all day.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Well, he&rsquo;s got his nerve!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (After another pause) I like him.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Don&rsquo;t say that. It hurts me.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Don&rsquo;t be a silly idiot. You know you&rsquo;re the only man I&rsquo;ve ever
      loved, ever will love.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (Quickly) Rosalind, let&rsquo;s get married&mdash;next week.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: We can&rsquo;t.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Why not?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, we can&rsquo;t. I&rsquo;d be your squaw&mdash;in some horrible place.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: We&rsquo;ll have two hundred and seventy-five dollars a month all told.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Darling, I don&rsquo;t even do my own hair, usually.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: I&rsquo;ll do it for you.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Between a laugh and a sob) Thanks.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Rosalind, you <i>can&rsquo;t</i> be thinking of marrying some one else.
      Tell me! You leave me in the dark. I can help you fight it out if you&rsquo;ll
      only tell me.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: It&rsquo;s just&mdash;us. We&rsquo;re pitiful, that&rsquo;s all. The very
      qualities I love you for are the ones that will always make you a failure.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (Grimly) Go on.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh&mdash;it <i>is</i> Dawson Ryder. He&rsquo;s so reliable, I almost
      feel that he&rsquo;d be a&mdash;a background.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: You don&rsquo;t love him.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I know, but I respect him, and he&rsquo;s a good man and a strong one.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (Grudgingly) Yes&mdash;he&rsquo;s that.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Well&mdash;here&rsquo;s one little thing. There was a little poor boy
      we met in Rye Tuesday afternoon&mdash;and, oh, Dawson took him on his lap
      and talked to him and promised him an Indian suit&mdash;and next day he
      remembered and bought it&mdash;and, oh, it was so sweet and I couldn&rsquo;t
      help thinking he&rsquo;d be so nice to&mdash;to our children&mdash;take care of
      them&mdash;and I wouldn&rsquo;t have to worry.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (In despair) Rosalind! Rosalind!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (With a faint roguishness) Don&rsquo;t look so consciously suffering.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: What power we have of hurting each other!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Commencing to sob again) It&rsquo;s been so perfect&mdash;you and I.
      So like a dream that I&rsquo;d longed for and never thought I&rsquo;d find. The first
      real unselfishness I&rsquo;ve ever felt in my life. And I can&rsquo;t see it fade out
      in a colorless atmosphere!
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: It won&rsquo;t&mdash;it won&rsquo;t!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I&rsquo;d rather keep it as a beautiful memory&mdash;tucked away in my
      heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Yes, women can do that&mdash;but not men. I&rsquo;d remember always, not
      the beauty of it while it lasted, but just the bitterness, the long
      bitterness.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Don&rsquo;t!
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: All the years never to see you, never to kiss you, just a gate shut
      and barred&mdash;you don&rsquo;t dare be my wife.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: No&mdash;no&mdash;I&rsquo;m taking the hardest course, the strongest
      course. Marrying you would be a failure and I never fail&mdash;if you
      don&rsquo;t stop walking up and down I&rsquo;ll scream!
    </p>
    <p>
      (Again he sinks despairingly onto the lounge.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Come over here and kiss me.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: No.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Don&rsquo;t you <i>want</i> to kiss me?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: To-night I want you to love me calmly and coolly.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: The beginning of the end.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (With a burst of insight) Amory, you&rsquo;re young. I&rsquo;m young. People
      excuse us now for our poses and vanities, for treating people like Sancho
      and yet getting away with it. They excuse us now. But you&rsquo;ve got a lot of
      knocks coming to you&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: And you&rsquo;re afraid to take them with me.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: No, not that. There was a poem I read somewhere&mdash;you&rsquo;ll say
      Ella Wheeler Wilcox and laugh&mdash;but listen:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;For this is wisdom&mdash;to love and live,
    To take what fate or the gods may give,
    To ask no question, to make no prayer,
    To kiss the lips and caress the hair,
    Speed passion&rsquo;s ebb as we greet its flow,
    To have and to hold, and, in time&mdash;let go.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      AMORY: But we haven&rsquo;t had.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Amory, I&rsquo;m yours&mdash;you know it. There have been times in the
      last month I&rsquo;d have been completely yours if you&rsquo;d said so. But I can&rsquo;t
      marry you and ruin both our lives.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: We&rsquo;ve got to take our chance for happiness.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Dawson says I&rsquo;d learn to love him.
    </p>
    <p>
      (AMORY with his head sunk in his hands does not move. The life seems
      suddenly gone out of him.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Lover! Lover! I can&rsquo;t do with you, and I can&rsquo;t imagine life
      without you.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Rosalind, we&rsquo;re on each other&rsquo;s nerves. It&rsquo;s just that we&rsquo;re both
      high-strung, and this week&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      (His voice is curiously old. She crosses to him and taking his face in her
      hands, kisses him.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I can&rsquo;t, Amory. I can&rsquo;t be shut away from the trees and flowers,
      cooped up in a little flat, waiting for you. You&rsquo;d hate me in a narrow
      atmosphere. I&rsquo;d make you hate me.
    </p>
    <p>
      (Again she is blinded by sudden uncontrolled tears.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Rosalind&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, darling, go&mdash;Don&rsquo;t make it harder! I can&rsquo;t stand it&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (His face drawn, his voice strained) Do you know what you&rsquo;re
      saying? Do you mean forever?
    </p>
    <p>
      (There is a difference somehow in the quality of their suffering.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Can&rsquo;t you see&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: I&rsquo;m afraid I can&rsquo;t if you love me. You&rsquo;re afraid of taking two
      years&rsquo; knocks with me.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I wouldn&rsquo;t be the Rosalind you love.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (A little hysterically) I can&rsquo;t give you up! I can&rsquo;t, that&rsquo;s all!
      I&rsquo;ve got to have you!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (A hard note in her voice) You&rsquo;re being a baby now.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (Wildly) I don&rsquo;t care! You&rsquo;re spoiling our lives!
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: I&rsquo;m doing the wise thing, the only thing.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Are you going to marry Dawson Ryder?
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, don&rsquo;t ask me. You know I&rsquo;m old in some ways&mdash;in others&mdash;well,
      I&rsquo;m just a little girl. I like sunshine and pretty things and cheerfulness&mdash;and
      I dread responsibility. I don&rsquo;t want to think about pots and kitchens and
      brooms. I want to worry whether my legs will get slick and brown when I
      swim in the summer.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: And you love me.
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: That&rsquo;s just why it has to end. Drifting hurts too much. We can&rsquo;t
      have any more scenes like this.
    </p>
    <p>
      (She draws his ring from her finger and hands it to him. Their eyes blind
      again with tears.)
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: (His lips against her wet cheek) Don&rsquo;t! Keep it, please&mdash;oh,
      don&rsquo;t break my heart!
    </p>
    <p>
      (She presses the ring softly into his hand.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: (Brokenly) You&rsquo;d better go.
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Good-by&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      (She looks at him once more, with infinite longing, infinite sadness.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Don&rsquo;t ever forget me, Amory&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      AMORY: Good-by&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      (He goes to the door, fumbles for the knob, finds it&mdash;she sees him
      throw back his head&mdash;and he is gone. Gone&mdash;she half starts from
      the lounge and then sinks forward on her face into the pillows.)
    </p>
    <p>
      ROSALIND: Oh, God, I want to die! (After a moment she rises and with her
      eyes closed feels her way to the door. Then she turns and looks once more
      at the room. Here they had sat and dreamed: that tray she had so often
      filled with matches for him; that shade that they had discreetly lowered
      one long Sunday afternoon. Misty-eyed she stands and remembers; she speaks
      aloud.) Oh, Amory, what have I done to you?
    </p>
    <p>
      (And deep under the aching sadness that will pass in time, Rosalind feels
      that she has lost something, she knows not what, she knows not why.)
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0006" id="link2HCH0006">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 2. Experiments in Convalescence
    </h2>
    <p>
      The Knickerbocker Bar, beamed upon by Maxfield Parrish&rsquo;s jovial, colorful
      &ldquo;Old King Cole,&rdquo; was well crowded. Amory stopped in the entrance and
      looked at his wrist-watch; he wanted particularly to know the time, for
      something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things
      off cleanly. Later it would satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think
      &ldquo;that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June
      10, 1919.&rdquo; This was allowing for the walk from her house&mdash;a walk
      concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness,
      of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional
      crisis and Rosalind&rsquo;s abrupt decision&mdash;the strain of it had drugged
      the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma. As he fumbled clumsily
      with the olives at the free-lunch table, a man approached and spoke to
      him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, Amory...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was some one he had known at Princeton; he had no idea of the name.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello, old boy&mdash;&rdquo; he heard himself saying.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Name&rsquo;s Jim Wilson&mdash;you&rsquo;ve forgotten.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sure, you bet, Jim. I remember.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Going to reunion?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know!&rdquo; Simultaneously he realized that he was not going to reunion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Get overseas?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory nodded, his eyes staring oddly. Stepping back to let some one pass,
      he knocked the dish of olives to a crash on the floor.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Too bad,&rdquo; he muttered. &ldquo;Have a drink?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Wilson, ponderously diplomatic, reached over and slapped him on the back.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve had plenty, old boy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory eyed him dumbly until Wilson grew embarrassed under the scrutiny.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Plenty, hell!&rdquo; said Amory finally. &ldquo;I haven&rsquo;t had a drink to-day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Wilson looked incredulous.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have a drink or not?&rdquo; cried Amory rudely.
    </p>
    <p>
      Together they sought the bar.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Rye high.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll just take a Bronx.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Wilson had another; Amory had several more. They decided to sit down. At
      ten o&rsquo;clock Wilson was displaced by Carling, class of &lsquo;15. Amory, his head
      spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over
      the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;S a mental was&rsquo;e,&rdquo; he insisted with owl-like wisdom. &ldquo;Two years my life
      spent inalleshual vacuity. Los&rsquo; idealism, got be physcal anmal,&rdquo; he shook
      his fist expressively at Old King Cole, &ldquo;got be Prussian &lsquo;bout ev&rsquo;thing,
      women &lsquo;specially. Use&rsquo; be straight &lsquo;bout women college. Now don&rsquo;givadam.&rdquo;
       He expressed his lack of principle by sweeping a seltzer bottle with a
      broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt
      his speech. &ldquo;Seek pleasure where find it for to-morrow die. &lsquo;At&rsquo;s
      philos&rsquo;phy for me now on.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Carling yawned, but Amory, waxing brilliant, continued:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Use&rsquo; wonder &lsquo;bout things&mdash;people satisfied compromise, fif&rsquo;y-fif&rsquo;y
      att&rsquo;tude on life. Now don&rsquo; wonder, don&rsquo; wonder&mdash;&rdquo; He became so
      emphatic in impressing on Carling the fact that he didn&rsquo;t wonder that he
      lost the thread of his discourse and concluded by announcing to the bar at
      large that he was a &ldquo;physcal anmal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What are you celebrating, Amory?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory leaned forward confidentially.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cel&rsquo;brating blowmylife. Great moment blow my life. Can&rsquo;t tell you &lsquo;bout
      it&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He heard Carling addressing a remark to the bartender:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Give him a bromo-seltzer.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory shook his head indignantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;None that stuff!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But listen, Amory, you&rsquo;re making yourself sick. You&rsquo;re white as a ghost.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory considered the question. He tried to look at himself in the mirror
      but even by squinting up one eye could only see as far as the row of
      bottles behind the bar.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Like som&rsquo;n solid. We go get some&mdash;some salad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He settled his coat with an attempt at nonchalance, but letting go of the
      bar was too much for him, and he slumped against a chair.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll go over to Shanley&rsquo;s,&rdquo; suggested Carling, offering an elbow.
    </p>
    <p>
      With this assistance Amory managed to get his legs in motion enough to
      propel him across Forty-second Street.
    </p>
    <p>
      Shanley&rsquo;s was very dim. He was conscious that he was talking in a loud
      voice, very succinctly and convincingly, he thought, about a desire to
      crush people under his heel. He consumed three club sandwiches, devouring
      each as though it were no larger than a chocolate-drop. Then Rosalind
      began popping into his mind again, and he found his lips forming her name
      over and over. Next he was sleepy, and he had a hazy, listless sense of
      people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table....
    </p>
    <p>
      ... He was in a room and Carling was saying something about a knot in his
      shoe-lace.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nemmine,&rdquo; he managed to articulate drowsily. &ldquo;Sleep in &lsquo;em....&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      STILL ALCOHOLIC
    </p>
    <p>
      He awoke laughing and his eyes lazily roamed his surroundings, evidently a
      bedroom and bath in a good hotel. His head was whirring and picture after
      picture was forming and blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond
      the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction. He reached for
      the &lsquo;phone beside his bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello&mdash;what hotel is this&mdash;?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Knickerbocker? All right, send up two rye high-balls&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He lay for a moment and wondered idly whether they&rsquo;d send up a bottle or
      just two of those little glass containers. Then, with an effort, he
      struggled out of bed and ambled into the bathroom.
    </p>
    <p>
      When he emerged, rubbing himself lazily with a towel, he found the bar boy
      with the drinks and had a sudden desire to kid him. On reflection he
      decided that this would be undignified, so he waved him away.
    </p>
    <p>
      As the new alcohol tumbled into his stomach and warmed him, the isolated
      pictures began slowly to form a cinema reel of the day before. Again he
      saw Rosalind curled weeping among the pillows, again he felt her tears
      against his cheek. Her words began ringing in his ears: &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t ever forget
      me, Amory&mdash;don&rsquo;t ever forget me&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hell!&rdquo; he faltered aloud, and then he choked and collapsed on the bed in
      a shaken spasm of grief. After a minute he opened his eyes and regarded
      the ceiling.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Damned fool!&rdquo; he exclaimed in disgust, and with a voluminous sigh rose
      and approached the bottle. After another glass he gave way loosely to the
      luxury of tears. Purposely he called up into his mind little incidents of
      the vanished spring, phrased to himself emotions that would make him react
      even more strongly to sorrow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We were so happy,&rdquo; he intoned dramatically, &ldquo;so very happy.&rdquo; Then he gave
      way again and knelt beside the bed, his head half-buried in the pillow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My own girl&mdash;my own&mdash;Oh&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He clinched his teeth so that the tears streamed in a flood from his eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh... my baby girl, all I had, all I wanted!... Oh, my girl, come back,
      come back! I need you... need you... we&rsquo;re so pitiful ... just misery we
      brought each other.... She&rsquo;ll be shut away from me.... I can&rsquo;t see her; I
      can&rsquo;t be her friend. It&rsquo;s got to be that way&mdash;it&rsquo;s got to be&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And then again:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve been so happy, so very happy....&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He rose to his feet and threw himself on the bed in an ecstasy of
      sentiment, and then lay exhausted while he realized slowly that he had
      been very drunk the night before, and that his head was spinning again
      wildly. He laughed, rose, and crossed again to Lethe....
    </p>
    <p>
      At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again.
      He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a
      British officer who was introduced to him as &ldquo;Captain Corn, of his
      Majesty&rsquo;s Foot,&rdquo; and he remembered attempting to recite &ldquo;Clair de Lune&rdquo; at
      luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o&rsquo;clock
      when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic
      dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected
      theatre tickets at Tyson&rsquo;s for a play that had a four-drink programme&mdash;a
      play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting
      effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly. He
      imagined afterward that it must have been &ldquo;The Jest.&rdquo;...
    </p>
    <p>
      ... Then the Cocoanut Grove, where Amory slept again on a little balcony
      outside. Out in Shanley&rsquo;s, Yonkers, he became almost logical, and by a
      careful control of the number of high-balls he drank, grew quite lucid and
      garrulous. He found that the party consisted of five men, two of whom he
      knew slightly; he became righteous about paying his share of the expense
      and insisted in a loud voice on arranging everything then and there to the
      amusement of the tables around him....
    </p>
    <p>
      Some one mentioned that a famous cabaret star was at the next table, so
      Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself... this involved
      him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter&mdash;Amory&rsquo;s
      attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy... he consented, after
      being confronted with irrefutable logic, to being led back to his own
      table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Decided to commit suicide,&rdquo; he announced suddenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When? Next year?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now. To-morrow morning. Going to take a room at the Commodore, get into a
      hot bath and open a vein.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s getting morbid!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You need another rye, old boy!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll all talk it over to-morrow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Amory was not to be dissuaded, from argument at least.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did you ever get that way?&rdquo; he demanded confidentially fortaccio.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sure!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Often?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My chronic state.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This provoked discussion. One man said that he got so depressed sometimes
      that he seriously considered it. Another agreed that there was nothing to
      live for. &ldquo;Captain Corn,&rdquo; who had somehow rejoined the party, said that in
      his opinion it was when one&rsquo;s health was bad that one felt that way most.
      Amory&rsquo;s suggestion was that they should each order a Bronx, mix broken
      glass in it, and drink it off. To his relief no one applauded the idea, so
      having finished his high-ball, he balanced his chin in his hand and his
      elbow on the table&mdash;a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping
      position, he assured himself&mdash;and went into a deep stupor....
    </p>
    <p>
      He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown,
      disarranged hair and dark blue eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take me home!&rdquo; she cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello!&rdquo; said Amory, blinking.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I like you,&rdquo; she announced tenderly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I like you too.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He noticed that there was a noisy man in the background and that one of
      his party was arguing with him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fella I was with&rsquo;s a damn fool,&rdquo; confided the blue-eyed woman. &ldquo;I hate
      him. I want to go home with you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You drunk?&rdquo; queried Amory with intense wisdom.
    </p>
    <p>
      She nodded coyly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go home with him,&rdquo; he advised gravely. &ldquo;He brought you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At this point the noisy man in the background broke away from his
      detainers and approached.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Say!&rdquo; he said fiercely. &ldquo;I brought this girl out here and you&rsquo;re butting
      in!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory regarded him coldly, while the girl clung to him closer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You let go that girl!&rdquo; cried the noisy man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory tried to make his eyes threatening.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You go to hell!&rdquo; he directed finally, and turned his attention to the
      girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Love first sight,&rdquo; he suggested.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I love you,&rdquo; she breathed and nestled close to him. She <i>did</i> have
      beautiful eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some one leaned over and spoke in Amory&rsquo;s ear.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s just Margaret Diamond. She&rsquo;s drunk and this fellow here brought
      her. Better let her go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let him take care of her, then!&rdquo; shouted Amory furiously. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m no W. Y.
      C. A. worker, am I?&mdash;am I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let her go!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s <i>her</i> hanging on, damn it! Let her hang!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The crowd around the table thickened. For an instant a brawl threatened,
      but a sleek waiter bent back Margaret Diamond&rsquo;s fingers until she released
      her hold on Amory, whereupon she slapped the waiter furiously in the face
      and flung her arms about her raging original escort.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, Lord!&rdquo; cried Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on, the taxis are getting scarce!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Check, waiter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;C&rsquo;mon, Amory. Your romance is over.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory laughed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t know how true you spoke. No idea. &lsquo;At&rsquo;s the whole trouble.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      AMORY ON THE LABOR QUESTION
    </p>
    <p>
      Two mornings later he knocked at the president&rsquo;s door at Bascome and
      Barlow&rsquo;s advertising agency.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come in!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory entered unsteadily.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Morning, Mr. Barlow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Barlow brought his glasses to the inspection and set his mouth
      slightly ajar that he might better listen.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, Mr. Blaine. We haven&rsquo;t seen you for several days.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Amory. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m quitting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;well&mdash;this is&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t like it here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry. I thought our relations had been quite&mdash;ah&mdash;pleasant.
      You seemed to be a hard worker&mdash;a little inclined perhaps to write
      fancy copy&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I just got tired of it,&rdquo; interrupted Amory rudely. &ldquo;It didn&rsquo;t matter a
      damn to me whether Harebell&rsquo;s flour was any better than any one else&rsquo;s. In
      fact, I never ate any of it. So I got tired of telling people about it&mdash;oh,
      I know I&rsquo;ve been drinking&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Barlow&rsquo;s face steeled by several ingots of expression.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You asked for a position&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory waved him to silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I think I was rottenly underpaid. Thirty-five dollars a week&mdash;less
      than a good carpenter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You had just started. You&rsquo;d never worked before,&rdquo; said Mr. Barlow coolly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But it took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write
      your darned stuff for you. Anyway, as far as length of service goes,
      you&rsquo;ve got stenographers here you&rsquo;ve paid fifteen a week for five years.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not going to argue with you, sir,&rdquo; said Mr. Barlow rising.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Neither am I. I just wanted to tell you I&rsquo;m quitting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They stood for a moment looking at each other impassively and then Amory
      turned and left the office.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      A LITTLE LULL
    </p>
    <p>
      Four days after that he returned at last to the apartment. Tom was engaged
      on a book review for The New Democracy on the staff of which he was
      employed. They regarded each other for a moment in silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good Lord, Amory, where&rsquo;d you get the black eye&mdash;and the jaw?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory laughed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s a mere nothing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He peeled off his coat and bared his shoulders.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Look here!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom emitted a low whistle.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What hit you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory laughed again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, a lot of people. I got beaten up. Fact.&rdquo; He slowly replaced his
      shirt. &ldquo;It was bound to come sooner or later and I wouldn&rsquo;t have missed it
      for anything.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who was it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, there were some waiters and a couple of sailors and a few stray
      pedestrians, I guess. It&rsquo;s the strangest feeling. You ought to get beaten
      up just for the experience of it. You fall down after a while and
      everybody sort of slashes in at you before you hit the ground&mdash;then
      they kick you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom lighted a cigarette.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I spent a day chasing you all over town, Amory. But you always kept a
      little ahead of me. I&rsquo;d say you&rsquo;ve been on some party.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory tumbled into a chair and asked for a cigarette.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You sober now?&rdquo; asked Tom quizzically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pretty sober. Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, Alec has left. His family had been after him to go home and live,
      so he&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A spasm of pain shook Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Too bad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, it is too bad. We&rsquo;ll have to get some one else if we&rsquo;re going to
      stay here. The rent&rsquo;s going up.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sure. Get anybody. I&rsquo;ll leave it to you, Tom.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory walked into his bedroom. The first thing that met his glance was a
      photograph of Rosalind that he had intended to have framed, propped up
      against a mirror on his dresser. He looked at it unmoved. After the vivid
      mental pictures of her that were his portion at present, the portrait was
      curiously unreal. He went back into the study.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Got a cardboard box?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; answered Tom, puzzled. &ldquo;Why should I have? Oh, yes&mdash;there may
      be one in Alec&rsquo;s room.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Eventually Amory found what he was looking for and, returning to his
      dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two
      little handkerchiefs, and some snap-shots. As he transferred them
      carefully to the box his mind wandered to some place in a book where the
      hero, after preserving for a year a cake of his lost love&rsquo;s soap, finally
      washed his hands with it. He laughed and began to hum &ldquo;After you&rsquo;ve gone&rdquo;
       ... ceased abruptly...
    </p>
    <p>
      The string broke twice, and then he managed to secure it, dropped the
      package into the bottom of his trunk, and having slammed the lid returned
      to the study.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Going out?&rdquo; Tom&rsquo;s voice held an undertone of anxiety.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Uh-huh.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Couldn&rsquo;t say, old keed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s have dinner together.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sorry. I told Sukey Brett I&rsquo;d eat with him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;By-by.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory crossed the street and had a high-ball; then he walked to Washington
      Square and found a top seat on a bus. He disembarked at Forty-third Street
      and strolled to the Biltmore bar.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hi, Amory!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;ll you have?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yo-ho! Waiter!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      TEMPERATURE NORMAL
    </p>
    <p>
      The advent of prohibition with the &ldquo;thirsty-first&rdquo; put a sudden stop to
      the submerging of Amory&rsquo;s sorrows, and when he awoke one morning to find
      that the old bar-to-bar days were over, he had neither remorse for the
      past three weeks nor regret that their repetition was impossible. He had
      taken the most violent, if the weakest, method to shield himself from the
      stabs of memory, and while it was not a course he would have prescribed
      for others, he found in the end that it had done its business: he was over
      the first flush of pain.
    </p>
    <p>
      Don&rsquo;t misunderstand! Amory had loved Rosalind as he would never love
      another living person. She had taken the first flush of his youth and
      brought from his unplumbed depths tenderness that had surprised him,
      gentleness and unselfishness that he had never given to another creature.
      He had later love-affairs, but of a different sort: in those he went back
      to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the
      mirror of a mood in him. Rosalind had drawn out what was more than
      passionate admiration; he had a deep, undying affection for Rosalind.
    </p>
    <p>
      But there had been, near the end, so much dramatic tragedy, culminating in
      the arabesque nightmare of his three weeks&rsquo; spree, that he was emotionally
      worn out. The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or
      delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge. He wrote a cynical
      story which featured his father&rsquo;s funeral and despatched it to a magazine,
      receiving in return a check for sixty dollars and a request for more of
      the same tone. This tickled his vanity, but inspired him to no further
      effort.
    </p>
    <p>
      He read enormously. He was puzzled and depressed by &ldquo;A Portrait of the
      Artist as a Young Man&rdquo;; intensely interested by &ldquo;Joan and Peter&rdquo; and &ldquo;The
      Undying Fire,&rdquo; and rather surprised by his discovery through a critic
      named Mencken of several excellent American novels: &ldquo;Vandover and the
      Brute,&rdquo; &ldquo;The Damnation of Theron Ware,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Jennie Gerhardt.&rdquo; Mackenzie,
      Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from
      sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries.
      Shaw&rsquo;s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously
      intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry
      into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention.
    </p>
    <p>
      He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed,
      but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor
      would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned
      him cold with horror.
    </p>
    <p>
      In his search for cool people he remembered Mrs. Lawrence, a very
      intelligent, very dignified lady, a convert to the church, and a great
      devotee of Monsignor&rsquo;s.
    </p>
    <p>
      He called her on the &lsquo;phone one day. Yes, she remembered him perfectly;
      no, Monsignor wasn&rsquo;t in town, was in Boston she thought; he&rsquo;d promised to
      come to dinner when he returned. Couldn&rsquo;t Amory take luncheon with her?
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thought I&rsquo;d better catch up, Mrs. Lawrence,&rdquo; he said rather ambiguously
      when he arrived.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Monsignor was here just last week,&rdquo; said Mrs. Lawrence regretfully. &ldquo;He
      was very anxious to see you, but he&rsquo;d left your address at home.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did he think I&rsquo;d plunged into Bolshevism?&rdquo; asked Amory, interested.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, he&rsquo;s having a frightful time.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;About the Irish Republic. He thinks it lacks dignity.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He went to Boston when the Irish President arrived and he was greatly
      distressed because the receiving committee, when they rode in an
      automobile, <i>would</i> put their arms around the President.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t blame him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, what impressed you more than anything while you were in the army?
      You look a great deal older.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s from another, more disastrous battle,&rdquo; he answered, smiling in
      spite of himself. &ldquo;But the army&mdash;let me see&mdash;well, I discovered
      that physical courage depends to a great extent on the physical shape a
      man is in. I found that I was as brave as the next man&mdash;it used to
      worry me before.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What else?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, the idea that men can stand anything if they get used to it, and
      the fact that I got a high mark in the psychological examination.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Lawrence laughed. Amory was finding it a great relief to be in this
      cool house on Riverside Drive, away from more condensed New York and the
      sense of people expelling great quantities of breath into a little space.
      Mrs. Lawrence reminded him vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in
      her perfect grace and dignity. The house, its furnishings, the manner in
      which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in
      the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that
      they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of
      more conservative &ldquo;Union Club&rdquo; families. He wondered if this air of
      symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was
      distilled through Mrs. Lawrence&rsquo;s New England ancestry or acquired in long
      residence in Italy and Spain.
    </p>
    <p>
      Two glasses of sauterne at luncheon loosened his tongue, and he talked,
      with what he felt was something of his old charm, of religion and
      literature and the menacing phenomena of the social order. Mrs. Lawrence
      was ostensibly pleased with him, and her interest was especially in his
      mind; he wanted people to like his mind again&mdash;after a while it might
      be such a nice place in which to live.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Monsignor Darcy still thinks that you&rsquo;re his reincarnation, that your
      faith will eventually clarify.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps,&rdquo; he assented. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m rather pagan at present. It&rsquo;s just that
      religion doesn&rsquo;t seem to have the slightest bearing on life at my age.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When he left her house he walked down Riverside Drive with a feeling of
      satisfaction. It was amusing to discuss again such subjects as this young
      poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the Irish Republic. Between the rancid
      accusations of Edward Carson and Justice Cohalan he had completely tired
      of the Irish question; yet there had been a time when his own Celtic
      traits were pillars of his personal philosophy.
    </p>
    <p>
      There seemed suddenly to be much left in life, if only this revival of old
      interests did not mean that he was backing away from it again&mdash;backing
      away from life itself.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      RESTLESSNESS
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m tres old and tres bored, Tom,&rdquo; said Amory one day, stretching himself
      at ease in the comfortable window-seat. He always felt most natural in a
      recumbent position.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You used to be entertaining before you started to write,&rdquo; he continued.
      &ldquo;Now you save any idea that you think would do to print.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Existence had settled back to an ambitionless normality. They had decided
      that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with
      the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English
      hunting prints on the wall were Tom&rsquo;s, and the large tapestry by courtesy,
      a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned
      candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more
      than a minute without acute spinal disorders&mdash;Tom claimed that this
      was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan&rsquo;s wraith&mdash;at any
      rate, it was Tom&rsquo;s furniture that decided them to stay.
    </p>
    <p>
      They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz
      or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received
      their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at
      twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had
      outgrown the passion for dancing with mid-Western or New Jersey debbies at
      the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the &ldquo;Club de Gink&rdquo;) or the Plaza Rose Room&mdash;besides
      even that required several cocktails &ldquo;to come down to the intellectual
      level of the women present,&rdquo; as Amory had once put it to a horrified
      matron.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton&mdash;the
      Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent
      obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for
      the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that
      the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory&rsquo;s hands.
      Nevertheless, even though it might not yield a cent for the next three
      years, Amory decided with a vague sentimentality that for the present, at
      any rate, he would not sell the house.
    </p>
    <p>
      This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite
      typical. He had risen at noon, lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden
      abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why shouldn&rsquo;t you be bored,&rdquo; yawned Tom. &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t that the conventional
      frame of mind for the young man of your age and condition?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Amory speculatively, &ldquo;but I&rsquo;m more than bored; I am restless.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Love and war did for you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; Amory considered, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not sure that the war itself had any great
      effect on either you or me&mdash;but it certainly ruined the old
      backgrounds, sort of killed individualism out of our generation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom looked up in surprise.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes it did,&rdquo; insisted Amory. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not sure it didn&rsquo;t kill it out of the
      whole world. Oh, Lord, what a pleasure it used to be to dream I might be a
      really great dictator or writer or religious or political leader&mdash;and
      now even a Leonardo da Vinci or Lorenzo de Medici couldn&rsquo;t be a real
      old-fashioned bolt in the world. Life is too huge and complex. The world
      is so overgrown that it can&rsquo;t lift its own fingers, and I was planning to
      be such an important finger&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t agree with you,&rdquo; Tom interrupted. &ldquo;There never were men placed in
      such egotistic positions since&mdash;oh, since the French Revolution.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory disagreed violently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a
      period of individualism. Wilson has only been powerful when he has
      represented; he&rsquo;s had to compromise over and over again. Just as soon as
      Trotsky and Lenin take a definite, consistent stand they&rsquo;ll become merely
      two-minute figures like Kerensky. Even Foch hasn&rsquo;t half the significance
      of Stonewall Jackson. War used to be the most individualistic pursuit of
      man, and yet the popular heroes of the war had neither authority nor
      responsibility: Guynemer and Sergeant York. How could a schoolboy make a
      hero of Pershing? A big man has no time really to do anything but just sit
      and be big.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then you don&rsquo;t think there will be any more permanent world heroes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;in history&mdash;not in life. Carlyle would have difficulty
      getting material for a new chapter on &lsquo;The Hero as a Big Man.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go on. I&rsquo;m a good listener to-day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;People try so hard to believe in leaders now, pitifully hard. But we no
      sooner get a popular reformer or politician or soldier or writer or
      philosopher&mdash;a Roosevelt, a Tolstoi, a Wood, a Shaw, a Nietzsche,
      than the cross-currents of criticism wash him away. My Lord, no man can
      stand prominence these days. It&rsquo;s the surest path to obscurity. People get
      sick of hearing the same name over and over.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then you blame it on the press?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Absolutely. Look at you; you&rsquo;re on The New Democracy, considered the most
      brilliant weekly in the country, read by the men who do things and all
      that. What&rsquo;s your business? Why, to be as clever, as interesting, and as
      brilliantly cynical as possible about every man, doctrine, book, or policy
      that is assigned you to deal with. The more strong lights, the more
      spiritual scandal you can throw on the matter, the more money they pay
      you, the more the people buy the issue. You, Tom d&rsquo;Invilliers, a blighted
      Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical
      consciousness of the race&mdash;Oh, don&rsquo;t protest, I know the stuff. I
      used to write book reviews in college; I considered it rare sport to refer
      to the latest honest, conscientious effort to propound a theory or a
      remedy as a &lsquo;welcome addition to our light summer reading.&rsquo; Come on now,
      admit it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom laughed, and Amory continued triumphantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We <i>want</i> to believe. Young students try to believe in older
      authors, constituents try to believe in their Congressmen, countries try
      to believe in their statesmen, but they <i>can&rsquo;t</i>. Too many voices, too
      much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism. It&rsquo;s worse in the
      case of newspapers. Any rich, unprogressive old party with that
      particularly grasping, acquisitive form of mentality known as financial
      genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of
      thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of
      modern living to swallow anything but predigested food. For two cents the
      voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy. A year later there is
      a new political ring or a change in the paper&rsquo;s ownership, consequence:
      more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their
      tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He paused only to get his breath.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas
      either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul
      without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people&rsquo;s heads; I might
      cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb,
      or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The
      New Democracy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s all this got to do with your being bored?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory considered that it had much to do with it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How&rsquo;ll I fit in?&rdquo; he demanded. &ldquo;What am I for? To propagate the race?
      According to the American novels we are led to believe that the &lsquo;healthy
      American boy&rsquo; from nineteen to twenty-five is an entirely sexless animal.
      As a matter of fact, the healthier he is the less that&rsquo;s true. The only
      alternative to letting it get you is some violent interest. Well, the war
      is over; I believe too much in the responsibilities of authorship to write
      just now; and business, well, business speaks for itself. It has no
      connection with anything in the world that I&rsquo;ve ever been interested in,
      except a slim, utilitarian connection with economics. What I&rsquo;d see of it,
      lost in a clerkship, for the next and best ten years of my life would have
      the intellectual content of an industrial movie.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Try fiction,&rdquo; suggested Tom.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Trouble is I get distracted when I start to write stories&mdash;get
      afraid I&rsquo;m doing it instead of living&mdash;get thinking maybe life is
      waiting for me in the Japanese gardens at the Ritz or at Atlantic City or
      on the lower East Side.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Anyway,&rdquo; he continued, &ldquo;I haven&rsquo;t the vital urge. I wanted to be a
      regular human being but the girl couldn&rsquo;t see it that way.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll find another.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;God! Banish the thought. Why don&rsquo;t you tell me that &lsquo;if the girl had been
      worth having she&rsquo;d have waited for you&rsquo;? No, sir, the girl really worth
      having won&rsquo;t wait for anybody. If I thought there&rsquo;d be another I&rsquo;d lose my
      remaining faith in human nature. Maybe I&rsquo;ll play&mdash;but Rosalind was
      the only girl in the wide world that could have held me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; yawned Tom, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve played confidant a good hour by the clock.
      Still, I&rsquo;m glad to see you&rsquo;re beginning to have violent views again on
      something.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am,&rdquo; agreed Amory reluctantly. &ldquo;Yet when I see a happy family it makes
      me sick at my stomach&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Happy families try to make people feel that way,&rdquo; said Tom cynically.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      TOM THE CENSOR
    </p>
    <p>
      There were days when Amory listened. These were when Tom, wreathed in
      smoke, indulged in the slaughter of American literature. Words failed him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fifty thousand dollars a year,&rdquo; he would cry. &ldquo;My God! Look at them, look
      at them&mdash;Edna Ferber, Gouverneur Morris, Fanny Hurst, Mary Roberts
      Rinehart&mdash;not producing among &lsquo;em one story or novel that will last
      ten years. This man Cobb&mdash;I don&rsquo;t tink he&rsquo;s either clever or amusing&mdash;and
      what&rsquo;s more, I don&rsquo;t think very many people do, except the editors. He&rsquo;s
      just groggy with advertising. And&mdash;oh Harold Bell Wright oh Zane Grey&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They try.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, they don&rsquo;t even try. Some of them <i>can</i> write, but they won&rsquo;t
      sit down and do one honest novel. Most of them <i>can&rsquo;t</i> write, I&rsquo;ll
      admit. I believe Rupert Hughes tries to give a real, comprehensive picture
      of American life, but his style and perspective are barbarous. Ernest
      Poole and Dorothy Canfield try but they&rsquo;re hindered by their absolute lack
      of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of
      spreading it thin. Every author ought to write every book as if he were
      going to be beheaded the day he finished it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is that double entente?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t slow me up! Now there&rsquo;s a few of &lsquo;em that seem to have some
      cultural background, some intelligence and a good deal of literary
      felicity but they just simply won&rsquo;t write honestly; they&rsquo;d all claim there
      was no public for good stuff. Then why the devil is it that Wells, Conrad,
      Galsworthy, Shaw, Bennett, and the rest depend on America for over half
      their sales?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How does little Tommy like the poets?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom was overcome. He dropped his arms until they swung loosely beside the
      chair and emitted faint grunts.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m writing a satire on &lsquo;em now, calling it &lsquo;Boston Bards and Hearst
      Reviewers.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s hear it,&rdquo; said Amory eagerly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve only got the last few lines done.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s very modern. Let&rsquo;s hear &lsquo;em, if they&rsquo;re funny.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Tom produced a folded paper from his pocket and read aloud, pausing at
      intervals so that Amory could see that it was free verse:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;So
    Walter Arensberg,
    Alfred Kreymborg,
    Carl Sandburg,
    Louis Untermeyer,
    Eunice Tietjens,
    Clara Shanafelt,
    James Oppenheim,
    Maxwell Bodenheim,
    Richard Glaenzer,
    Scharmel Iris,
    Conrad Aiken,
    I place your names here
    So that you may live
    If only as names,
    Sinuous, mauve-colored names,
    In the Juvenalia
    Of my collected editions.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Amory roared.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You win the iron pansy. I&rsquo;ll buy you a meal on the arrogance of the last
      two lines.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory did not entirely agree with Tom&rsquo;s sweeping damnation of American
      novelists and poets. He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington,
      and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What I hate is this idiotic drivel about &lsquo;I am God&mdash;I am man&mdash;I
      ride the winds&mdash;I look through the smoke&mdash;I am the life sense.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s ghastly!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I wish American novelists would give up trying to make business
      romantically interesting. Nobody wants to read about it, unless it&rsquo;s
      crooked business. If it was an entertaining subject they&rsquo;d buy the life of
      James J. Hill and not one of these long office tragedies that harp along
      on the significance of smoke&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And gloom,&rdquo; said Tom. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s another favorite, though I&rsquo;ll admit the
      Russians have the monopoly. Our specialty is stories about little girls
      who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they
      smile so much. You&rsquo;d think we were a race of cheerful cripples and that
      the common end of the Russian peasant was suicide&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Six o&rsquo;clock,&rdquo; said Amory, glancing at his wrist-watch. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll buy you a
      grea&rsquo; big dinner on the strength of the Juvenalia of your collected
      editions.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      LOOKING BACKWARD
    </p>
    <p>
      July sweltered out with a last hot week, and Amory in another surge of
      unrest realized that it was just five months since he and Rosalind had
      met. Yet it was already hard for him to visualize the heart-whole boy who
      had stepped off the transport, passionately desiring the adventure of
      life. One night while the heat, overpowering and enervating, poured into
      the windows of his room he struggled for several hours in a vague effort
      to immortalize the poignancy of that time.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  The February streets, wind-washed by night, blow full of strange
  half-intermittent damps, bearing on wasted walks in shining sight
  wet snow plashed into gleams under the lamps, like golden oil
  from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars.

  Strange damps&mdash;full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life
  borne in upon a lull....  Oh, I was young, for I could turn
  again to you, most finite and most beautiful, and taste the stuff
  of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth.

 ... There was a tanging in the midnight air&mdash;silence was dead and
  sound not yet awoken&mdash;Life cracked like ice!&mdash;one brilliant note
  and there, radiant and pale, you stood... and spring had broken.
  (The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city
  swooned.)

  Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts
  kissed, high on the long, mazed wires&mdash;eerie half-laughter echoes
  here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has
  followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.

</pre>
    <hr />
    <p>
      ANOTHER ENDING
    </p>
    <p>
      In mid-August came a letter from Monsignor Darcy, who had evidently just
      stumbled on his address:
    </p>
    <p>
      MY DEAR BOY:&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      Your last letter was quite enough to make me worry about you. It was not a
      bit like yourself. Reading between the lines I should imagine that your
      engagement to this girl is making you rather unhappy, and I see you have
      lost all the feeling of romance that you had before the war. You make a
      great mistake if you think you can be romantic without religion. Sometimes
      I think that with both of us the secret of success, when we find it, is
      the mystical element in us: something flows into us that enlarges our
      personalities, and when it ebbs out our personalities shrink; I should
      call your last two letters rather shrivelled. Beware of losing yourself in
      the personality of another being, man or woman.
    </p>
    <p>
      His Eminence Cardinal O&rsquo;Neill and the Bishop of Boston are staying with me
      at present, so it is hard for me to get a moment to write, but I wish you
      would come up here later if only for a week-end. I go to Washington this
      week.
    </p>
    <p>
      What I shall do in the future is hanging in the balance. Absolutely
      between ourselves I should not be surprised to see the red hat of a
      cardinal descend upon my unworthy head within the next eight months. In
      any event, I should like to have a house in New York or Washington where
      you could drop in for week-ends.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory, I&rsquo;m very glad we&rsquo;re both alive; this war could easily have been the
      end of a brilliant family. But in regard to matrimony, you are now at the
      most dangerous period of your life. You might marry in haste and repent at
      leisure, but I think you won&rsquo;t. From what you write me about the present
      calamitous state of your finances, what you want is naturally impossible.
      However, if I judge you by the means I usually choose, I should say that
      there will be something of an emotional crisis within the next year.
    </p>
    <p>
      Do write me. I feel annoyingly out of date on you.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
          With greatest affection,

                              THAYER DARCY.
</pre>
    <p>
      Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell
      precipitously to pieces. The immediate cause was the serious and probably
      chronic illness of Tom&rsquo;s mother. So they stored the furniture, gave
      instructions to sublet and shook hands gloomily in the Pennsylvania
      Station. Amory and Tom seemed always to be saying good-by.
    </p>
    <p>
      Feeling very much alone, Amory yielded to an impulse and set off
      southward, intending to join Monsignor in Washington. They missed
      connections by two hours, and, deciding to spend a few days with an
      ancient, remembered uncle, Amory journeyed up through the luxuriant fields
      of Maryland into Ramilly County. But instead of two days his stay lasted
      from mid-August nearly through September, for in Maryland he met Eleanor.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0007" id="link2HCH0007">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 3. Young Irony
    </h2>
    <p>
      For years afterward when Amory thought of Eleanor he seemed still to hear
      the wind sobbing around him and sending little chills into the places
      beside his heart. The night when they rode up the slope and watched the
      cold moon float through the clouds, he lost a further part of him that
      nothing could restore; and when he lost it he lost also the power of
      regretting it. Eleanor was, say, the last time that evil crept close to
      Amory under the mask of beauty, the last weird mystery that held him with
      wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes.
    </p>
    <p>
      With her his imagination ran riot and that is why they rode to the highest
      hill and watched an evil moon ride high, for they knew then that they
      could see the devil in each other. But Eleanor&mdash;did Amory dream her?
      Afterward their ghosts played, yet both of them hoped from their souls
      never to meet. Was it the infinite sadness of her eyes that drew him or
      the mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind?
      She will have no other adventure like Amory, and if she reads this she
      will say:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And Amory will have no other adventure like me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Nor will she sigh, any more than he would sigh.
    </p>
    <p>
      Eleanor tried to put it on paper once:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;The fading things we only know
      We&rsquo;ll have forgotten...
        Put away...
    Desires that melted with the snow,
      And dreams begotten
        This to-day:
    The sudden dawns we laughed to greet,
      That all could see, that none could share,
    Will be but dawns... and if we meet
      We shall not care.

    Dear... not one tear will rise for this...
      A little while hence
        No regret
    Will stir for a remembered kiss&mdash;
      Not even silence,
        When we&rsquo;ve met,
    Will give old ghosts a waste to roam,
      Or stir the surface of the sea...
    If gray shapes drift beneath the foam
      We shall not see.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      They quarrelled dangerously because Amory maintained that <i>sea</i> and
      <i>see</i> couldn&rsquo;t possibly be used as a rhyme. And then Eleanor had part
      of another verse that she couldn&rsquo;t find a beginning for:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;... But wisdom passes... still the years
    Will feed us wisdom....  Age will go
    Back to the old&mdash;
      For all our tears
        We shall not know.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Eleanor hated Maryland passionately. She belonged to the oldest of the old
      families of Ramilly County and lived in a big, gloomy house with her
      grandfather. She had been born and brought up in France.... I see I am
      starting wrong. Let me begin again.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory was bored, as he usually was in the country. He used to go for far
      walks by himself&mdash;and wander along reciting &ldquo;Ulalume&rdquo; to the
      corn-fields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that
      atmosphere of smiling complacency. One afternoon he had strolled for
      several miles along a road that was new to him, and then through a wood on
      bad advice from a colored woman... losing himself entirely. A passing
      storm decided to break out, and to his great impatience the sky grew black
      as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become
      suddenly furtive and ghostly. Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the
      valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries. He
      stumbled blindly on, hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of
      twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken
      lightning showed open country. He rushed to the edge of the woods and then
      hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter
      of the little house marked by a light far down the valley. It was only
      half past five, but he could see scarcely ten steps before him, except
      when the lightning made everything vivid and grotesque for great sweeps
      around.
    </p>
    <p>
      Suddenly a strange sound fell on his ears. It was a song, in a low, husky
      voice, a girl&rsquo;s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him. A
      year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood
      he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Les sanglots longs
    Des violons
      De l&rsquo;automne
    Blessent mon coeur
    D&rsquo;une langueur
      Monotone.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      The lightning split the sky, but the song went on without a quaver. The
      girl was evidently in the field and the voice seemed to come vaguely from
      a haystack about twenty feet in front of him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and
      hung and fell and blended with the rain:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Tout suffocant
    Et bleme quand
      Sonne l&rsquo;heure
    Je me souviens
    Des jours anciens
      Et je pleure....&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who the devil is there in Ramilly County,&rdquo; muttered Amory aloud, &ldquo;who
      would deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Somebody&rsquo;s there!&rdquo; cried the voice unalarmed. &ldquo;Who are you?&mdash;Manfred,
      St. Christopher, or Queen Victoria?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m Don Juan!&rdquo; Amory shouted on impulse, raising his voice above the
      noise of the rain and the wind.
    </p>
    <p>
      A delighted shriek came from the haystack.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know who you are&mdash;you&rsquo;re the blond boy that likes &lsquo;Ulalume&rsquo;&mdash;I
      recognize your voice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How do I get up?&rdquo; he cried from the foot of the haystack, whither he had
      arrived, dripping wet. A head appeared over the edge&mdash;it was so dark
      that Amory could just make out a patch of damp hair and two eyes that
      gleamed like a cat&rsquo;s.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Run back!&rdquo; came the voice, &ldquo;and jump and I&rsquo;ll catch your hand&mdash;no,
      not there&mdash;on the other side.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He followed directions and as he sprawled up the side, knee-deep in hay, a
      small, white hand reached out, gripped his, and helped him onto the top.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here you are, Juan,&rdquo; cried she of the damp hair. &ldquo;Do you mind if I drop
      the Don?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve got a thumb like mine!&rdquo; he exclaimed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you&rsquo;re holding my hand, which is dangerous without seeing my face.&rdquo;
       He dropped it quickly.
    </p>
    <p>
      As if in answer to his prayers came a flash of lightning and he looked
      eagerly at her who stood beside him on the soggy haystack, ten feet above
      the ground. But she had covered her face and he saw nothing but a slender
      figure, dark, damp, bobbed hair, and the small white hands with the thumbs
      that bent back like his.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sit down,&rdquo; she suggested politely, as the dark closed in on them. &ldquo;If
      you&rsquo;ll sit opposite me in this hollow you can have half of the raincoat,
      which I was using as a water-proof tent until you so rudely interrupted
      me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was asked,&rdquo; Amory said joyfully; &ldquo;you asked me&mdash;you know you did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don Juan always manages that,&rdquo; she said, laughing, &ldquo;but I shan&rsquo;t call you
      that any more, because you&rsquo;ve got reddish hair. Instead you can recite
      &lsquo;Ulalume&rsquo; and I&rsquo;ll be Psyche, your soul.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory flushed, happily invisible under the curtain of wind and rain. They
      were sitting opposite each other in a slight hollow in the hay with the
      raincoat spread over most of them, and the rain doing for the rest. Amory
      was trying desperately to see Psyche, but the lightning refused to flash
      again, and he waited impatiently. Good Lord! supposing she wasn&rsquo;t
      beautiful&mdash;supposing she was forty and pedantic&mdash;heavens!
      Suppose, only suppose, she was mad. But he knew the last was unworthy.
      Here had Providence sent a girl to amuse him just as it sent Benvenuto
      Cellini men to murder, and he was wondering if she was mad, just because
      she exactly filled his mood.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not what?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not mad. I didn&rsquo;t think you were mad when I first saw you, so it isn&rsquo;t
      fair that you should think so of me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How on earth&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      As long as they knew each other Eleanor and Amory could be &ldquo;on a subject&rdquo;
       and stop talking with the definite thought of it in their heads, yet ten
      minutes later speak aloud and find that their minds had followed the same
      channels and led them each to a parallel idea, an idea that others would
      have found absolutely unconnected with the first.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me,&rdquo; he demanded, leaning forward eagerly, &ldquo;how do you know about
      &lsquo;Ulalume&rsquo;&mdash;how did you know the color of my hair? What&rsquo;s your name?
      What were you doing here? Tell me all at once!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Suddenly the lightning flashed in with a leap of overreaching light and he
      saw Eleanor, and looked for the first time into those eyes of hers. Oh,
      she was magnificent&mdash;pale skin, the color of marble in starlight,
      slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding
      glare. She was a witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy
      and with the tell-tale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness
      and a delight. He sank back with a gasp against the wall of hay.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now you&rsquo;ve seen me,&rdquo; she said calmly, &ldquo;and I suppose you&rsquo;re about to say
      that my green eyes are burning into your brain.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What color is your hair?&rdquo; he asked intently. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s bobbed, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, it&rsquo;s bobbed. I don&rsquo;t know what color it is,&rdquo; she answered, musing,
      &ldquo;so many men have asked me. It&rsquo;s medium, I suppose&mdash;No one ever looks
      long at my hair. I&rsquo;ve got beautiful eyes, though, haven&rsquo;t I. I don&rsquo;t care
      what you say, I have beautiful eyes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Answer my question, Madeline.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t remember them all&mdash;besides my name isn&rsquo;t Madeline, it&rsquo;s
      Eleanor.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I might have guessed it. You <i>look</i> like Eleanor&mdash;you have that
      Eleanor look. You know what I mean.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a silence as they listened to the rain.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s going down my neck, fellow lunatic,&rdquo; she offered finally.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Answer my questions.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;name of Savage, Eleanor; live in big old house mile down road;
      nearest living relation to be notified, grandfather&mdash;Ramilly Savage;
      height, five feet four inches; number on watch-case, 3077 W; nose,
      delicate aquiline; temperament, uncanny&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And me,&rdquo; Amory interrupted, &ldquo;where did you see me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you&rsquo;re one of <i>those</i> men,&rdquo; she answered haughtily, &ldquo;must lug
      old self into conversation. Well, my boy, I was behind a hedge sunning
      myself one day last week, and along comes a man saying in a pleasant,
      conceited way of talking:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
    &ldquo;&lsquo;And now when the night was senescent&rsquo; 
                              (says he)
    &lsquo;And the star dials pointed to morn
    At the end of the path a liquescent&rsquo; 
                              (says he)
    &lsquo;And nebulous lustre was born.&rsquo; 
</pre>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So I poked my eyes up over the hedge, but you had started to run, for
      some unknown reason, and so I saw but the back of your beautiful head.
      &lsquo;Oh!&rsquo; says I, &lsquo;there&rsquo;s a man for whom many of us might sigh,&rsquo; and I
      continued in my best Irish&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right,&rdquo; Amory interrupted. &ldquo;Now go back to yourself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I will. I&rsquo;m one of those people who go through the world giving
      other people thrills, but getting few myself except those I read into men
      on such nights as these. I have the social courage to go on the stage, but
      not the energy; I haven&rsquo;t the patience to write books; and I never met a
      man I&rsquo;d marry. However, I&rsquo;m only eighteen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The storm was dying down softly and only the wind kept up its ghostly
      surge and made the stack lean and gravely settle from side to side. Amory
      was in a trance. He felt that every moment was precious. He had never met
      a girl like this before&mdash;she would never seem quite the same again.
      He didn&rsquo;t at all feel like a character in a play, the appropriate feeling
      in an unconventional situation&mdash;instead, he had a sense of coming
      home.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have just made a great decision,&rdquo; said Eleanor after another pause,
      &ldquo;and that is why I&rsquo;m here, to answer another of your questions. I have
      just decided that I don&rsquo;t believe in immortality.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Really! how banal!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Frightfully so,&rdquo; she answered, &ldquo;but depressing with a stale, sickly
      depression, nevertheless. I came out here to get wet&mdash;like a wet hen;
      wet hens always have great clarity of mind,&rdquo; she concluded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go on,&rdquo; Amory said politely.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;I&rsquo;m not afraid of the dark, so I put on my slicker and rubber
      boots and came out. You see I was always afraid, before, to say I didn&rsquo;t
      believe in God&mdash;because the lightning might strike me&mdash;but here
      I am and it hasn&rsquo;t, of course, but the main point is that this time I
      wasn&rsquo;t any more afraid of it than I had been when I was a Christian
      Scientist, like I was last year. So now I know I&rsquo;m a materialist and I was
      fraternizing with the hay when you came out and stood by the woods, scared
      to death.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, you little wretch&mdash;&rdquo; cried Amory indignantly. &ldquo;Scared of what?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;<i>Yourself!</i>&rdquo; she shouted, and he jumped. She clapped her hands and
      laughed. &ldquo;See&mdash;see! Conscience&mdash;kill it like me! Eleanor Savage,
      materiologist&mdash;no jumping, no starting, come early&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I <i>have</i> to have a soul,&rdquo; he objected. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t be rational&mdash;and
      I won&rsquo;t be molecular.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She leaned toward him, her burning eyes never leaving his own and
      whispered with a sort of romantic finality:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thought so, Juan, I feared so&mdash;you&rsquo;re sentimental. You&rsquo;re not like
      me. I&rsquo;m a romantic little materialist.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not sentimental&mdash;I&rsquo;m as romantic as you are. The idea, you know,
      is that the sentimental person thinks things will last&mdash;the romantic
      person has a desperate confidence that they won&rsquo;t.&rdquo; (This was an ancient
      distinction of Amory&rsquo;s.)
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Epigrams. I&rsquo;m going home,&rdquo; she said sadly. &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s get off the haystack
      and walk to the cross-roads.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They slowly descended from their perch. She would not let him help her
      down and motioning him away arrived in a graceful lump in the soft mud
      where she sat for an instant, laughing at herself. Then she jumped to her
      feet and slipped her hand into his, and they tiptoed across the fields,
      jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot. A transcendent delight
      seemed to sparkle in every pool of water, for the moon had risen and the
      storm had scurried away into western Maryland. When Eleanor&rsquo;s arm touched
      his he felt his hands grow cold with deadly fear lest he should lose the
      shadow brush with which his imagination was painting wonders of her. He
      watched her from the corners of his eyes as ever he did when he walked
      with her&mdash;she was a feast and a folly and he wished it had been his
      destiny to sit forever on a haystack and see life through her green eyes.
      His paganism soared that night and when she faded out like a gray ghost
      down the road, a deep singing came out of the fields and filled his way
      homeward. All night the summer moths flitted in and out of Amory&rsquo;s window;
      all night large looming sounds swayed in mystic revery through the silver
      grain&mdash;and he lay awake in the clear darkness.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      SEPTEMBER
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory selected a blade of grass and nibbled at it scientifically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I never fall in love in August or September,&rdquo; he proffered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Christmas or Easter. I&rsquo;m a liturgist.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Easter!&rdquo; She turned up her nose. &ldquo;Huh! Spring in corsets!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Easter <i>would</i> bore spring, wouldn&rsquo;t she? Easter has her hair
      braided, wears a tailored suit.&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  &ldquo;Bind on thy sandals, oh, thou most fleet.
   Over the splendor and speed of thy feet&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      quoted Eleanor softly, and then added: &ldquo;I suppose Hallowe&rsquo;en is a better
      day for autumn than Thanksgiving.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Much better&mdash;and Christmas eve does very well for winter, but
      summer...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Summer has no day,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;We can&rsquo;t possibly have a summer love. So
      many people have tried that the name&rsquo;s become proverbial. Summer is only
      the unfulfilled promise of spring, a charlatan in place of the warm balmy
      nights I dream of in April. It&rsquo;s a sad season of life without growth....
      It has no day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fourth of July,&rdquo; Amory suggested facetiously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be funny!&rdquo; she said, raking him with her eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, what could fulfil the promise of spring?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She thought a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I suppose heaven would, if there was one,&rdquo; she said finally, &ldquo;a sort
      of pagan heaven&mdash;you ought to be a materialist,&rdquo; she continued
      irrelevantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because you look a good deal like the pictures of Rupert Brooke.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      To some extent Amory tried to play Rupert Brooke as long as he knew
      Eleanor. What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward
      himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman&rsquo;s literary moods. Often
      she sat in the grass, a lazy wind playing with her short hair, her voice
      husky as she ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki. There
      was something most passionate in Eleanor&rsquo;s reading aloud. They seemed
      nearer, not only mentally, but physically, when they read, than when she
      was in his arms, and this was often, for they fell half into love almost
      from the first. Yet was Amory capable of love now? He could, as always,
      run through the emotions in a half hour, but even while they revelled in
      their imaginations, he knew that neither of them could care as he had
      cared once before&mdash;I suppose that was why they turned to Brooke, and
      Swinburne, and Shelley. Their chance was to make everything fine and
      finished and rich and imaginative; they must bend tiny golden tentacles
      from his imagination to hers, that would take the place of the great, deep
      love that was never so near, yet never so much of a dream.
    </p>
    <p>
      One poem they read over and over; Swinburne&rsquo;s &ldquo;Triumph of Time,&rdquo; and four
      lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the
      fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs.
      Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he
      heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour,
      To think of things that are well outworn;
    Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower,
      The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her
      history. The Ramillys were two: old Mr. Ramilly and his granddaughter,
      Eleanor. She had lived in France with a restless mother whom Amory
      imagined to have been very like his own, on whose death she had come to
      America, to live in Maryland. She had gone to Baltimore first to stay with
      a bachelor uncle, and there she insisted on being a debutante at the age
      of seventeen. She had a wild winter and arrived in the country in March,
      having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and
      shocked them into fiery protest. A rather fast crowd had come out, who
      drank cocktails in limousines and were promiscuously condescending and
      patronizing toward older people, and Eleanor with an esprit that hinted
      strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St.
      Timothy&rsquo;s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness. When the
      story came to her uncle, a forgetful cavalier of a more hypocritical era,
      there was a scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and
      indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country
      on the near side of senility. That&rsquo;s as far as her story went; she told
      him the rest herself, but that was later.
    </p>
    <p>
      Often they swam and as Amory floated lazily in the water he shut his mind
      to all thoughts except those of hazy soap-bubble lands where the sun
      splattered through wind-drunk trees. How could any one possibly think or
      worry, or do anything except splash and dive and loll there on the edge of
      time while the flower months failed. Let the days move over&mdash;sadness
      and memory and pain recurred outside, and here, once more, before he went
      on to meet them he wanted to drift and be young.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were days when Amory resented that life had changed from an even
      progress along a road stretching ever in sight, with the scenery merging
      and blending, into a succession of quick, unrelated scenes&mdash;two years
      of sweat and blood, that sudden absurd instinct for paternity that
      Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this
      autumn with Eleanor. He felt that it would take all time, more than he
      could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the
      scrap-book of his life. It was all like a banquet where he sat for this
      half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together. For
      months it seemed that he had alternated between being borne along a stream
      of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not
      desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave&rsquo;s top and swept along
      again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The despairing, dying autumn and our love&mdash;how well they harmonize!&rdquo;
       said Eleanor sadly one day as they lay dripping by the water.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Indian summer of our hearts&mdash;&rdquo; he ceased.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me,&rdquo; she said finally, &ldquo;was she light or dark?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Light.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Was she more beautiful than I am?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know,&rdquo; said Amory shortly.
    </p>
    <p>
      One night they walked while the moon rose and poured a great burden of
      glory over the garden until it seemed fairyland with Amory and Eleanor,
      dim phantasmal shapes, expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love
      moods. Then they turned out of the moonlight into the trellised darkness
      of a vine-hung pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be
      nearly musical.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Light a match,&rdquo; she whispered. &ldquo;I want to see you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Scratch! Flare!
    </p>
    <p>
      The night and the scarred trees were like scenery in a play, and to be
      there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar.
      Amory thought how it was only the past that ever seemed strange and
      unbelievable. The match went out.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s black as pitch.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;re just voices now,&rdquo; murmured Eleanor, &ldquo;little lonesome voices. Light
      another.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That was my last match.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Suddenly he caught her in his arms.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You <i>are</i> mine&mdash;you know you&rsquo;re mine!&rdquo; he cried wildly... the
      moonlight twisted in through the vines and listened... the fireflies hung
      upon their whispers as if to win his glance from the glory of their eyes.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      THE END OF SUMMER
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No wind is stirring in the grass; not one wind stirs... the water in the
      hidden pools, as glass, fronts the full moon and so inters the golden
      token in its icy mass,&rdquo; chanted Eleanor to the trees that skeletoned the
      body of the night. &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it ghostly here? If you can hold your horse&rsquo;s
      feet up, let&rsquo;s cut through the woods and find the hidden pools.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s after one, and you&rsquo;ll get the devil,&rdquo; he objected, &ldquo;and I don&rsquo;t know
      enough about horses to put one away in the pitch dark.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shut up, you old fool,&rdquo; she whispered irrelevantly, and, leaning over,
      she patted him lazily with her riding-crop. &ldquo;You can leave your old plug
      in our stable and I&rsquo;ll send him over to-morrow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But my uncle has got to drive me to the station with this old plug at
      seven o&rsquo;clock.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be a spoil-sport&mdash;remember, you have a tendency toward
      wavering that prevents you from being the entire light of my life.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory drew his horse up close beside, and, leaning toward her, grasped her
      hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Say I am&mdash;<i>quick</i>, or I&rsquo;ll pull you over and make you ride
      behind me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked up and smiled and shook her head excitedly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, do!&mdash;or rather, don&rsquo;t! Why are all the exciting things so
      uncomfortable, like fighting and exploring and ski-ing in Canada? By the
      way, we&rsquo;re going to ride up Harper&rsquo;s Hill. I think that comes in our
      programme about five o&rsquo;clock.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You little devil,&rdquo; Amory growled. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re going to make me stay up all
      night and sleep in the train like an immigrant all day to-morrow, going
      back to New York.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hush! some one&rsquo;s coming along the road&mdash;let&rsquo;s go! Whoo-ee-oop!&rdquo; And
      with a shout that probably gave the belated traveller a series of shivers,
      she turned her horse into the woods and Amory followed slowly, as he had
      followed her all day for three weeks.
    </p>
    <p>
      The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a
      graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative
      pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental
      teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
  When Vanity kissed Vanity, a hundred happy Junes ago, he
  pondered o&rsquo;er her breathlessly, and, that all men might ever
  know, he rhymed her eyes with life and death:

  &ldquo;Thru Time I&rsquo;ll save my love!&rdquo; he said... yet Beauty
  vanished with his breath, and, with her lovers, she was dead...

  &mdash;Ever his wit and not her eyes, ever his art and not her hair:

  &ldquo;Who&rsquo;d learn a trick in rhyme, be wise and pause before his
  sonnet there&rdquo;...  So all my words, however true, might sing
  you to a thousandth June, and no one ever <i>know</i> that you were
  Beauty for an afternoon.
</pre>
    <p>
      So he wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the &ldquo;Dark
      Lady of the Sonnets,&rdquo; and how little we remembered her as the great man
      wanted her remembered. For what Shakespeare <i>must</i> have desired, to
      have been able to write with such divine despair, was that the lady should
      live... and now we have no real interest in her.... The irony of it is
      that if he had cared <i>more</i> for the poem than for the lady the sonnet
      would be only obvious, imitative rhetoric and no one would ever have read
      it after twenty years....
    </p>
    <p>
      This was the last night Amory ever saw Eleanor. He was leaving in the
      morning and they had agreed to take a long farewell trot by the cold
      moonlight. She wanted to talk, she said&mdash;perhaps the last time in her
      life that she could be rational (she meant pose with comfort). So they had
      turned into the woods and rode for half an hour with scarcely a word,
      except when she whispered &ldquo;Damn!&rdquo; at a bothersome branch&mdash;whispered
      it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it. Then they started up
      Harper&rsquo;s Hill, walking their tired horses.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good Lord! It&rsquo;s quiet here!&rdquo; whispered Eleanor; &ldquo;much more lonesome than
      the woods.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hate woods,&rdquo; Amory said, shuddering. &ldquo;Any kind of foliage or underbrush
      at night. Out here it&rsquo;s so broad and easy on the spirit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The long slope of a long hill.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And the cold moon rolling moonlight down it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And thee and me, last and most important.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was quiet that night&mdash;the straight road they followed up to the
      edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time. Only an occasional negro
      cabin, silver-gray in the rock-ribbed moonlight, broke the long line of
      bare ground; behind lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting
      on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon. It was much colder&mdash;so
      cold that it settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their
      minds.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The end of summer,&rdquo; said Eleanor softly. &ldquo;Listen to the beat of our
      horses&rsquo; hoofs&mdash;&lsquo;tump-tump-tump-a-tump.&rsquo; Have you ever been feverish
      and had all noises divide into &lsquo;tump-tump-tump&rsquo; until you could swear
      eternity was divisible into so many tumps? That&rsquo;s the way I feel&mdash;old
      horses go tump-tump.... I guess that&rsquo;s the only thing that separates
      horses and clocks from us. Human beings can&rsquo;t go &lsquo;tump-tump-tump&rsquo; without
      going crazy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The breeze freshened and Eleanor pulled her cape around her and shivered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you very cold?&rdquo; asked Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I&rsquo;m thinking about myself&mdash;my black old inside self, the real
      one, with the fundamental honesty that keeps me from being absolutely
      wicked by making me realize my own sins.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They were riding up close by the cliff and Amory gazed over. Where the
      fall met the ground a hundred feet below, a black stream made a sharp
      line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Rotten, rotten old world,&rdquo; broke out Eleanor suddenly, &ldquo;and the
      wretchedest thing of all is me&mdash;oh, <i>why</i> am I a girl? Why am I
      not a stupid&mdash;? Look at you; you&rsquo;re stupider than I am, not much, but
      some, and you can lope about and get bored and then lope somewhere else,
      and you can play around with girls without being involved in meshes of
      sentiment, and you can do anything and be justified&mdash;and here am I
      with the brains to do everything, yet tied to the sinking ship of future
      matrimony. If I were born a hundred years from now, well and good, but now
      what&rsquo;s in store for me&mdash;I have to marry, that goes without saying.
      Who? I&rsquo;m too bright for most men, and yet I have to descend to their level
      and let them patronize my intellect in order to get their attention. Every
      year that I don&rsquo;t marry I&rsquo;ve got less chance for a first-class man. At the
      best I can have my choice from one or two cities and, of course, I have to
      marry into a dinner-coat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Listen,&rdquo; she leaned close again, &ldquo;I like clever men and good-looking men,
      and, of course, no one cares more for personality than I do. Oh, just one
      person in fifty has any glimmer of what sex is. I&rsquo;m hipped on Freud and
      all that, but it&rsquo;s rotten that every bit of <i>real</i> love in the world
      is ninety-nine per cent passion and one little soupcon of jealousy.&rdquo; She
      finished as suddenly as she began.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course, you&rsquo;re right,&rdquo; Amory agreed. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a rather unpleasant
      overpowering force that&rsquo;s part of the machinery under everything. It&rsquo;s
      like an actor that lets you see his mechanics! Wait a minute till I think
      this out....&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He paused and tried to get a metaphor. They had turned the cliff and were
      riding along the road about fifty feet to the left.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You see every one&rsquo;s got to have some cloak to throw around it. The
      mediocre intellects, Plato&rsquo;s second class, use the remnants of romantic
      chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment&mdash;and we who consider
      ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it&rsquo;s another
      side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the
      fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it.
      But the truth is that sex is right in the middle of our purest
      abstractions, so close that it obscures vision.... I can kiss you now and
      will. ...&rdquo; He leaned toward her in his saddle, but she drew away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t&mdash;I can&rsquo;t kiss you now&mdash;I&rsquo;m more sensitive.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re more stupid then,&rdquo; he declared rather impatiently. &ldquo;Intellect is
      no protection from sex any more than convention is...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is?&rdquo; she fired up. &ldquo;The Catholic Church or the maxims of Confucius?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory looked up, rather taken aback.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s your panacea, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;Oh, you&rsquo;re just an old
      hypocrite, too. Thousands of scowling priests keeping the degenerate
      Italians and illiterate Irish repentant with gabble-gabble about the sixth
      and ninth commandments. It&rsquo;s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual
      rouge and panaceas. I&rsquo;ll tell you there is no God, not even a definite
      abstract goodness; so it&rsquo;s all got to be worked out for the individual by
      the individual here in high white foreheads like mine, and you&rsquo;re too much
      the prig to admit it.&rdquo; She let go her reins and shook her little fists at
      the stars.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If there&rsquo;s a God let him strike me&mdash;strike me!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Talking about God again after the manner of atheists,&rdquo; Amory said
      sharply. His materialism, always a thin cloak, was torn to shreds by
      Eleanor&rsquo;s blasphemy.... She knew it and it angered him that she knew it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And like most intellectuals who don&rsquo;t find faith convenient,&rdquo; he
      continued coldly, &ldquo;like Napoleon and Oscar Wilde and the rest of your
      type, you&rsquo;ll yell loudly for a priest on your death-bed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Eleanor drew her horse up sharply and he reined in beside her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will I?&rdquo; she said in a queer voice that scared him. &ldquo;Will I? Watch! <i>I&rsquo;m
      going over the cliff!</i>&rdquo; And before he could interfere she had turned
      and was riding breakneck for the end of the plateau.
    </p>
    <p>
      He wheeled and started after her, his body like ice, his nerves in a vast
      clangor. There was no chance of stopping her. The moon was under a cloud
      and her horse would step blindly over. Then some ten feet from the edge of
      the cliff she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways&mdash;plunged
      from her horse and, rolling over twice, landed in a pile of brush five
      feet from the edge. The horse went over with a frantic whinny. In a minute
      he was by Eleanor&rsquo;s side and saw that her eyes were open.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eleanor!&rdquo; he cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      She did not answer, but her lips moved and her eyes filled with sudden
      tears.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eleanor, are you hurt?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; I don&rsquo;t think so,&rdquo; she said faintly, and then began weeping.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My horse dead?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good God&mdash;Yes!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh!&rdquo; she wailed. &ldquo;I thought I was going over. I didn&rsquo;t know&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He helped her gently to her feet and boosted her onto his saddle. So they
      started homeward; Amory walking and she bent forward on the pommel,
      sobbing bitterly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve got a crazy streak,&rdquo; she faltered, &ldquo;twice before I&rsquo;ve done things
      like that. When I was eleven mother went&mdash;went mad&mdash;stark raving
      crazy. We were in Vienna&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      All the way back she talked haltingly about herself, and Amory&rsquo;s love
      waned slowly with the moon. At her door they started from habit to kiss
      good night, but she could not run into his arms, nor were they stretched
      to meet her as in the week before. For a minute they stood there, hating
      each other with a bitter sadness. But as Amory had loved himself in
      Eleanor, so now what he hated was only a mirror. Their poses were strewn
      about the pale dawn like broken glass. The stars were long gone and there
      were left only the little sighing gusts of wind and the silences
      between... but naked souls are poor things ever, and soon he turned
      homeward and let new lights come in with the sun.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      A POEM THAT ELEANOR SENT AMORY SEVERAL YEARS LATER
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 &ldquo;Here, Earth-born, over the lilt of the water,
    Lisping its music and bearing a burden of light,
  Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter...
    Here we may whisper unheard, unafraid of the night.
  Walking alone... was it splendor, or what, we were bound with,
    Deep in the time when summer lets down her hair?
  Shadows we loved and the patterns they covered the ground with
    Tapestries, mystical, faint in the breathless air.

  That was the day... and the night for another story,
    Pale as a dream and shadowed with pencilled trees&mdash;
  Ghosts of the stars came by who had sought for glory,
    Whispered to us of peace in the plaintive breeze,
  Whispered of old dead faiths that the day had shattered,
    Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon;
  That was the urge that we knew and the language that mattered
    That was the debt that we paid to the usurer June.

  Here, deepest of dreams, by the waters that bring not
    Anything back of the past that we need not know,
  What if the light is but sun and the little streams sing not,
    We are together, it seems... I have loved you so...
  What did the last night hold, with the summer over,
    Drawing us back to the home in the changing glade?
  <i>What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover?</i>
    God!... till you stirred in your sleep... and were wild
      afraid...

  Well... we have passed... we are chronicle now to the eerie.
    Curious metal from meteors that failed in the sky;
  Earth-born the tireless is stretched by the water, quite weary,
    Close to this ununderstandable changeling that&rsquo;s I...
  Fear is an echo we traced to Security&rsquo;s daughter;
    Now we are faces and voices... and less, too soon,
  Whispering half-love over the lilt of the water...
    Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <hr />
    <p>
      A POEM AMORY SENT TO ELEANOR AND WHICH HE CALLED &ldquo;SUMMER STORM&rdquo;
     </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Faint winds, and a song fading and leaves falling,
    Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter...
    And the rain and over the fields a voice calling...

    Our gray blown cloud scurries and lifts above,
    Slides on the sun and flutters there to waft her
    Sisters on.  The shadow of a dove
    Falls on the cote, the trees are filled with wings;
    And down the valley through the crying trees
    The body of the darker storm flies; brings
    With its new air the breath of sunken seas
    And slender tenuous thunder...
                                  But I wait...
    Wait for the mists and for the blacker rain&mdash;
    Heavier winds that stir the veil of fate,
    Happier winds that pile her hair;
                                  Again
    They tear me, teach me, strew the heavy air
    Upon me, winds that I know, and storm.

    There was a summer every rain was rare;
    There was a season every wind was warm....
    And now you pass me in the mist... your hair
    Rain-blown about you, damp lips curved once more
    In that wild irony, that gay despair
    That made you old when we have met before;
    Wraith-like you drift on out before the rain,
    Across the fields, blown with the stemless flowers,
    With your old hopes, dead leaves and loves again&mdash;
    Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours
    (Whispers will creep into the growing dark...
    Tumult will die over the trees)
                                  Now night
    Tears from her wetted breast the splattered blouse
    Of day, glides down the dreaming hills, tear-bright,
    To cover with her hair the eerie green...
    Love for the dusk... Love for the glistening after;
    Quiet the trees to their last tops... serene...

    Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter...&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0008" id="link2HCH0008">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 4. The Supercilious Sacrifice
    </h2>
    <p>
      Atlantic City. Amory paced the board walk at day&rsquo;s end, lulled by the
      everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of
      the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper
      than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys
      ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British
      dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of
      one dark July into the North Sea.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;Amory Blaine!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory looked down into the street below. A low racing car had drawn to a
      stop and a familiar cheerful face protruded from the driver&rsquo;s seat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on down, goopher!&rdquo; cried Alec.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory called a greeting and descending a flight of wooden steps approached
      the car. He and Alec had been meeting intermittently, but the barrier of
      Rosalind lay always between them. He was sorry for this; he hated to lose
      Alec.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. Blaine, this is Miss Waterson, Miss Wayne, and Mr. Tully.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How d&rsquo;y do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory,&rdquo; said Alec exuberantly, &ldquo;if you&rsquo;ll jump in we&rsquo;ll take you to some
      secluded nook and give you a wee jolt of Bourbon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory considered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s an idea.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Step in&mdash;move over, Jill, and Amory will smile very handsomely at
      you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory squeezed into the back seat beside a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello, Doug Fairbanks,&rdquo; she said flippantly. &ldquo;Walking for exercise or
      hunting for company?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was counting the waves,&rdquo; replied Amory gravely. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m going in for
      statistics.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t kid me, Doug.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When they reached an unfrequented side street Alec stopped the car among
      deep shadows.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What you doing down here these cold days, Amory?&rdquo; he demanded, as he
      produced a quart of Bourbon from under the fur rug.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory avoided the question. Indeed, he had had no definite reason for
      coming to the coast.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you remember that party of ours, sophomore year?&rdquo; he asked instead.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do I? When we slept in the pavilions up in Asbury Park&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lord, Alec! It&rsquo;s hard to think that Jesse and Dick and Kerry are all
      three dead.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Alec shivered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t talk about it. These dreary fall days depress me enough.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Jill seemed to agree.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Doug here is sorta gloomy anyways,&rdquo; she commented. &ldquo;Tell him to drink
      deep&mdash;it&rsquo;s good and scarce these days.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What I really want to ask you, Amory, is where you are&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, New York, I suppose&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I mean to-night, because if you haven&rsquo;t got a room yet you&rsquo;d better help
      me out.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Glad to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You see, Tully and I have two rooms with bath between at the Ranier, and
      he&rsquo;s got to go back to New York. I don&rsquo;t want to have to move. Question
      is, will you occupy one of the rooms?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory was willing, if he could get in right away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll find the key in the office; the rooms are in my name.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Declining further locomotion or further stimulation, Amory left the car
      and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or
      write, love or dissipate. For the first time in his life he rather longed
      for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and
      struggles and exultations. His youth seemed never so vanished as now in
      the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous,
      joyful party of four years before. Things that had been the merest
      commonplaces of his life then, deep sleep, the sense of beauty around him,
      all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with
      the great listlessness of his disillusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To hold a man a woman has to appeal to the worst in him.&rdquo; This sentence
      was the thesis of most of his bad nights, of which he felt this was to be
      one. His mind had already started to play variations on the subject.
      Tireless passion, fierce jealousy, longing to possess and crush&mdash;these
      alone were left of all his love for Rosalind; these remained to him as
      payment for the loss of his youth&mdash;bitter calomel under the thin
      sugar of love&rsquo;s exaltation.
    </p>
    <p>
      In his room he undressed and wrapping himself in blankets to keep out the
      chill October air drowsed in an armchair by the open window.
    </p>
    <p>
      He remembered a poem he had read months before:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;Oh staunch old heart who toiled so long for me,
    I waste my years sailing along the sea&mdash;&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Yet he had no sense of waste, no sense of the present hope that waste
      implied. He felt that life had rejected him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Rosalind! Rosalind!&rdquo; He poured the words softly into the half-darkness
      until she seemed to permeate the room; the wet salt breeze filled his hair
      with moisture, the rim of a moon seared the sky and made the curtains dim
      and ghostly. He fell asleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      When he awoke it was very late and quiet. The blanket had slipped partly
      off his shoulders and he touched his skin to find it damp and cold.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he became aware of a tense whispering not ten feet away.
    </p>
    <p>
      He became rigid.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t make a sound!&rdquo; It was Alec&rsquo;s voice. &ldquo;Jill&mdash;do you hear me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;&rdquo; breathed very low, very frightened. They were in the
      bathroom.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then his ears caught a louder sound from somewhere along the corridor
      outside. It was a mumbling of men&rsquo;s voices and a repeated muffled rapping.
      Amory threw off the blankets and moved close to the bathroom door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My God!&rdquo; came the girl&rsquo;s voice again. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll have to let them in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sh!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Suddenly a steady, insistent knocking began at Amory&rsquo;s hall door and
      simultaneously out of the bathroom came Alec, followed by the
      vermilion-lipped girl. They were both clad in pajamas.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Amory!&rdquo; an anxious whisper.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s the trouble?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s house detectives. My God, Amory&mdash;they&rsquo;re just looking for a
      test-case&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, better let them in.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t understand. They can get me under the Mann Act.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The girl followed him slowly, a rather miserable, pathetic figure in the
      darkness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory tried to plan quickly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You make a racket and let them in your room,&rdquo; he suggested anxiously,
      &ldquo;and I&rsquo;ll get her out by this door.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They&rsquo;re here too, though. They&rsquo;ll watch this door.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Can&rsquo;t you give a wrong name?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No chance. I registered under my own name; besides, they&rsquo;d trail the auto
      license number.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Say you&rsquo;re married.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Jill says one of the house detectives knows her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The girl had stolen to the bed and tumbled upon it; lay there listening
      wretchedly to the knocking which had grown gradually to a pounding. Then
      came a man&rsquo;s voice, angry and imperative:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Open up or we&rsquo;ll break the door in!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      In the silence when this voice ceased Amory realized that there were other
      things in the room besides people... over and around the figure crouched
      on the bed there hung an aura, gossamer as a moonbeam, tainted as stale,
      weak wine, yet a horror, diffusively brooding already over the three of
      them... and over by the window among the stirring curtains stood something
      else, featureless and indistinguishable, yet strangely familiar....
      Simultaneously two great cases presented themselves side by side to Amory;
      all that took place in his mind, then, occupied in actual time less than
      ten seconds.
    </p>
    <p>
      The first fact that flashed radiantly on his comprehension was the great
      impersonality of sacrifice&mdash;he perceived that what we call love and
      hate, reward and punishment, had no more to do with it than the date of
      the month. He quickly recapitulated the story of a sacrifice he had heard
      of in college: a man had cheated in an examination; his roommate in a gust
      of sentiment had taken the entire blame&mdash;due to the shame of it the
      innocent one&rsquo;s entire future seemed shrouded in regret and failure, capped
      by the ingratitude of the real culprit. He had finally taken his own life&mdash;years
      afterward the facts had come out. At the time the story had both puzzled
      and worried Amory. Now he realized the truth; that sacrifice was no
      purchase of freedom. It was like a great elective office, it was like an
      inheritance of power&mdash;to certain people at certain times an essential
      luxury, carrying with it not a guarantee but a responsibility, not a
      security but an infinite risk. Its very momentum might drag him down to
      ruin&mdash;the passing of the emotional wave that made it possible might
      leave the one who made it high and dry forever on an island of despair.
    </p>
    <p>
      ... Amory knew that afterward Alec would secretly hate him for having done
      so much for him....
    </p>
    <p>
      ... All this was flung before Amory like an opened scroll, while ulterior
      to him and speculating upon him were those two breathless, listening
      forces: the gossamer aura that hung over and about the girl and that
      familiar thing by the window.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sacrifice by its very nature was arrogant and impersonal; sacrifice should
      be eternally supercilious.
    </p>
    <p>
      <i>Weep not for me but for thy children.</i>
    </p>
    <p>
      That&mdash;thought Amory&mdash;would be somehow the way God would talk to
      me.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory felt a sudden surge of joy and then like a face in a motion-picture
      the aura over the bed faded out; the dynamic shadow by the window, that
      was as near as he could name it, remained for the fraction of a moment and
      then the breeze seemed to lift it swiftly out of the room. He clinched his
      hands in quick ecstatic excitement... the ten seconds were up....
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do what I say, Alec&mdash;do what I say. Do you understand?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Alec looked at him dumbly&mdash;his face a tableau of anguish.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have a family,&rdquo; continued Amory slowly. &ldquo;You have a family and it&rsquo;s
      important that you should get out of this. Do you hear me?&rdquo; He repeated
      clearly what he had said. &ldquo;Do you hear me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hear you.&rdquo; The voice was curiously strained, the eyes never for a
      second left Amory&rsquo;s.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Alec, you&rsquo;re going to lie down here. If any one comes in you act drunk.
      You do what I say&mdash;if you don&rsquo;t I&rsquo;ll probably kill you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was another moment while they stared at each other. Then Amory went
      briskly to the bureau and, taking his pocket-book, beckoned peremptorily
      to the girl. He heard one word from Alec that sounded like &ldquo;penitentiary,&rdquo;
       then he and Jill were in the bathroom with the door bolted behind them.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re here with me,&rdquo; he said sternly. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve been with me all evening.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She nodded, gave a little half cry.
    </p>
    <p>
      In a second he had the door of the other room open and three men entered.
      There was an immediate flood of electric light and he stood there
      blinking.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve been playing a little too dangerous a game, young man!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory laughed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The leader of the trio nodded authoritatively at a burly man in a check
      suit.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right, Olson.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I got you, Mr. O&rsquo;May,&rdquo; said Olson, nodding. The other two took a curious
      glance at their quarry and then withdrew, closing the door angrily behind
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      The burly man regarded Amory contemptuously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Didn&rsquo;t you ever hear of the Mann Act? Coming down here with her,&rdquo; he
      indicated the girl with his thumb, &ldquo;with a New York license on your car&mdash;to
      a hotel like <i>this</i>.&rdquo; He shook his head implying that he had
      struggled over Amory but now gave him up.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said Amory rather impatiently, &ldquo;what do you want us to do?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Get dressed, quick&mdash;and tell your friend not to make such a racket.&rdquo;
       Jill was sobbing noisily on the bed, but at these words she subsided
      sulkily and, gathering up her clothes, retired to the bathroom. As Amory
      slipped into Alec&rsquo;s B. V. D.&lsquo;s he found that his attitude toward the
      situation was agreeably humorous. The aggrieved virtue of the burly man
      made him want to laugh.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Anybody else here?&rdquo; demanded Olson, trying to look keen and ferret-like.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fellow who had the rooms,&rdquo; said Amory carelessly. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s drunk as an owl,
      though. Been in there asleep since six o&rsquo;clock.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll take a look at him presently.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How did you find out?&rdquo; asked Amory curiously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Night clerk saw you go up-stairs with this woman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory nodded; Jill reappeared from the bathroom, completely if rather
      untidily arrayed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now then,&rdquo; began Olson, producing a note-book, &ldquo;I want your real names&mdash;no
      damn John Smith or Mary Brown.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wait a minute,&rdquo; said Amory quietly. &ldquo;Just drop that big-bully stuff. We
      merely got caught, that&rsquo;s all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Olson glared at him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Name?&rdquo; he snapped.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory gave his name and New York address.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And the lady?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Miss Jill&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Say,&rdquo; cried Olson indignantly, &ldquo;just ease up on the nursery rhymes.
      What&rsquo;s your name? Sarah Murphy? Minnie Jackson?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, my God!&rdquo; cried the girl cupping her tear-stained face in her hands.
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want my mother to know. I don&rsquo;t want my mother to know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on now!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shut up!&rdquo; cried Amory at Olson.
    </p>
    <p>
      An instant&rsquo;s pause.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stella Robbins,&rdquo; she faltered finally. &ldquo;General Delivery, Rugway, New
      Hampshire.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Olson snapped his note-book shut and looked at them very ponderously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;By rights the hotel could turn the evidence over to the police and you&rsquo;d
      go to penitentiary, you would, for bringin&rsquo; a girl from one State to
      &lsquo;nother f&rsquo;r immoral purp&rsquo;ses&mdash;&rdquo; He paused to let the majesty of his
      words sink in. &ldquo;But&mdash;the hotel is going to let you off.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It doesn&rsquo;t want to get in the papers,&rdquo; cried Jill fiercely. &ldquo;Let us off!
      Huh!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A great lightness surrounded Amory. He realized that he was safe and only
      then did he appreciate the full enormity of what he might have incurred.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;However,&rdquo; continued Olson, &ldquo;there&rsquo;s a protective association among the
      hotels. There&rsquo;s been too much of this stuff, and we got a &lsquo;rangement with
      the newspapers so that you get a little free publicity. Not the name of
      the hotel, but just a line sayin&rsquo; that you had a little trouble in &lsquo;lantic
      City. See?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I see.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re gettin&rsquo; off light&mdash;damn light&mdash;but&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on,&rdquo; said Amory briskly. &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s get out of here. We don&rsquo;t need a
      valedictory.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Olson walked through the bathroom and took a cursory glance at Alec&rsquo;s
      still form. Then he extinguished the lights and motioned them to follow
      him. As they walked into the elevator Amory considered a piece of bravado&mdash;yielded
      finally. He reached out and tapped Olson on the arm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Would you mind taking off your hat? There&rsquo;s a lady in the elevator.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Olson&rsquo;s hat came off slowly. There was a rather embarrassing two minutes
      under the lights of the lobby while the night clerk and a few belated
      guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head,
      the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference
      was quite obvious. Then the chill outdoors&mdash;where the salt air was
      fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You can get one of those taxis and beat it,&rdquo; said Olson, pointing to the
      blurred outline of two machines whose drivers were presumably asleep
      inside.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-by,&rdquo; said Olson. He reached in his pocket suggestively, but Amory
      snorted, and, taking the girl&rsquo;s arm, turned away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where did you tell the driver to go?&rdquo; she asked as they whirled along the
      dim street.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The station.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If that guy writes my mother&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He won&rsquo;t. Nobody&rsquo;ll ever know about this&mdash;except our friends and
      enemies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Dawn was breaking over the sea.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s getting blue,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It does very well,&rdquo; agreed Amory critically, and then as an
      after-thought: &ldquo;It&rsquo;s almost breakfast-time&mdash;do you want something to
      eat?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Food&mdash;&rdquo; she said with a cheerful laugh. &ldquo;Food is what queered the
      party. We ordered a big supper to be sent up to the room about two
      o&rsquo;clock. Alec didn&rsquo;t give the waiter a tip, so I guess the little bastard
      snitched.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Jill&rsquo;s low spirits seemed to have gone faster than the scattering night.
      &ldquo;Let me tell you,&rdquo; she said emphatically, &ldquo;when you want to stage that
      sorta party stay away from liquor, and when you want to get tight stay
      away from bedrooms.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll remember.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He tapped suddenly at the glass and they drew up at the door of an
      all-night restaurant.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is Alec a great friend of yours?&rdquo; asked Jill as they perched themselves
      on high stools inside, and set their elbows on the dingy counter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He used to be. He probably won&rsquo;t want to be any more&mdash;and never
      understand why.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was sorta crazy you takin&rsquo; all that blame. Is he pretty important?
      Kinda more important than you are?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory laughed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That remains to be seen,&rdquo; he answered. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s the question.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      THE COLLAPSE OF SEVERAL PILLARS
    </p>
    <p>
      Two days later back in New York Amory found in a newspaper what he had
      been searching for&mdash;a dozen lines which announced to whom it might
      concern that Mr. Amory Blaine, who &ldquo;gave his address&rdquo; as, etc., had been
      requested to leave his hotel in Atlantic City because of entertaining in
      his room a lady <i>not</i> his wife.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he started, and his fingers trembled, for directly above was a longer
      paragraph of which the first words were:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage are announcing the engagement of their
      daughter, Rosalind, to Mr. J. Dawson Ryder, of Hartford, Connecticut&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He dropped the paper and lay down on his bed with a frightened, sinking
      sensation in the pit of his stomach. She was gone, definitely, finally
      gone. Until now he had half unconsciously cherished the hope deep in his
      heart that some day she would need him and send for him, cry that it had
      been a mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him.
      Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her&mdash;not
      this Rosalind, harder, older&mdash;nor any beaten, broken woman that his
      imagination brought to the door of his forties&mdash;Amory had wanted her
      youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was
      selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind
      was dead.
    </p>
    <p>
      A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which
      informed him that as three more street-car companies had gone into the
      hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances.
      Last of all, on a dazed Sunday night, a telegram told him of Monsignor
      Darcy&rsquo;s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before.
    </p>
    <p>
      He knew then what it was that he had perceived among the curtains of the
      room in Atlantic City.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0009" id="link2HCH0009">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      CHAPTER 5. The Egotist Becomes a Personage
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
   &ldquo;A fathom deep in sleep I lie
      With old desires, restrained before,
    To clamor lifeward with a cry,
      As dark flies out the greying door;
    And so in quest of creeds to share
      I seek assertive day again...
    But old monotony is there:
      Endless avenues of rain.

    Oh, might I rise again!  Might I
      Throw off the heat of that old wine,
    See the new morning mass the sky
      With fairy towers, line on line;
    Find each mirage in the high air
      A symbol, not a dream again...
    But old monotony is there:
      Endless avenues of rain.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Under the glass portcullis of a theatre Amory stood, watching the first
      great drops of rain splatter down and flatten to dark stains on the
      sidewalk. The air became gray and opalescent; a solitary light suddenly
      outlined a window over the way; then another light; then a hundred more
      danced and glimmered into vision. Under his feet a thick, iron-studded
      skylight turned yellow; in the street the lamps of the taxi-cabs sent out
      glistening sheens along the already black pavement. The unwelcome November
      rain had perversely stolen the day&rsquo;s last hour and pawned it with that
      ancient fence, the night.
    </p>
    <p>
      The silence of the theatre behind him ended with a curious snapping sound,
      followed by the heavy roaring of a rising crowd and the interlaced clatter
      of many voices. The matinee was over.
    </p>
    <p>
      He stood aside, edged a little into the rain to let the throng pass. A
      small boy rushed out, sniffed in the damp, fresh air and turned up the
      collar of his coat; came three or four couples in a great hurry; came a
      further scattering of people whose eyes as they emerged glanced
      invariably, first at the wet street, then at the rain-filled air, finally
      at the dismal sky; last a dense, strolling mass that depressed him with
      its heavy odor compounded of the tobacco smell of the men and the fetid
      sensuousness of stale powder on women. After the thick crowd came another
      scattering; a stray half-dozen; a man on crutches; finally the rattling
      bang of folding seats inside announced that the ushers were at work.
    </p>
    <p>
      New York seemed not so much awakening as turning over in its bed. Pallid
      men rushed by, pinching together their coat-collars; a great swarm of
      tired, magpie girls from a department-store crowded along with shrieks of
      strident laughter, three to an umbrella; a squad of marching policemen
      passed, already miraculously protected by oilskin capes.
    </p>
    <p>
      The rain gave Amory a feeling of detachment, and the numerous unpleasant
      aspects of city life without money occurred to him in threatening
      procession. There was the ghastly, stinking crush of the subway&mdash;the
      car cards thrusting themselves at one, leering out like dull bores who
      grab your arm with another story; the querulous worry as to whether some
      one isn&rsquo;t leaning on you; a man deciding not to give his seat to a woman,
      hating her for it; the woman hating him for not doing it; at worst a
      squalid phantasmagoria of breath, and old cloth on human bodies and the
      smells of the food men ate&mdash;at best just people&mdash;too hot or too
      cold, tired, worried.
    </p>
    <p>
      He pictured the rooms where these people lived&mdash;where the patterns of
      the blistered wall-papers were heavy reiterated sunflowers on green and
      yellow backgrounds, where there were tin bathtubs and gloomy hallways and
      verdureless, unnamable spaces in back of the buildings; where even love
      dressed as seduction&mdash;a sordid murder around the corner, illicit
      motherhood in the flat above. And always there was the economical
      stuffiness of indoor winter, and the long summers, nightmares of
      perspiration between sticky enveloping walls... dirty restaurants where
      careless, tired people helped themselves to sugar with their own used
      coffee-spoons, leaving hard brown deposits in the bowl.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was not so bad where there were only men or else only women; it was
      when they were vilely herded that it all seemed so rotten. It was some
      shame that women gave off at having men see them tired and poor&mdash;it
      was some disgust that men had for women who were tired and poor. It was
      dirtier than any battle-field he had seen, harder to contemplate than any
      actual hardship moulded of mire and sweat and danger, it was an atmosphere
      wherein birth and marriage and death were loathsome, secret things.
    </p>
    <p>
      He remembered one day in the subway when a delivery boy had brought in a
      great funeral wreath of fresh flowers, how the smell of it had suddenly
      cleared the air and given every one in the car a momentary glow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I detest poor people,&rdquo; thought Amory suddenly. &ldquo;I hate them for being
      poor. Poverty may have been beautiful once, but it&rsquo;s rotten now. It&rsquo;s the
      ugliest thing in the world. It&rsquo;s essentially cleaner to be corrupt and
      rich than it is to be innocent and poor.&rdquo; He seemed to see again a figure
      whose significance had once impressed him&mdash;a well-dressed young man
      gazing from a club window on Fifth Avenue and saying something to his
      companion with a look of utter disgust. Probably, thought Amory, what he
      said was: &ldquo;My God! Aren&rsquo;t people horrible!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Never before in his life had Amory considered poor people. He thought
      cynically how completely he was lacking in all human sympathy. O. Henry
      had found in these people romance, pathos, love, hate&mdash;Amory saw only
      coarseness, physical filth, and stupidity. He made no self-accusations:
      never any more did he reproach himself for feelings that were natural and
      sincere. He accepted all his reactions as a part of him, unchangeable,
      unmoral. This problem of poverty transformed, magnified, attached to some
      grander, more dignified attitude might some day even be his problem; at
      present it roused only his profound distaste.
    </p>
    <p>
      He walked over to Fifth Avenue, dodging the blind, black menace of
      umbrellas, and standing in front of Delmonico&rsquo;s hailed an auto-bus.
      Buttoning his coat closely around him he climbed to the roof, where he
      rode in solitary state through the thin, persistent rain, stung into
      alertness by the cool moisture perpetually reborn on his cheek. Somewhere
      in his mind a conversation began, rather resumed its place in his
      attention. It was composed not of two voices, but of one, which acted
      alike as questioner and answerer:
    </p>
    <p>
      Question.&mdash;Well&mdash;what&rsquo;s the situation?
    </p>
    <p>
      Answer.&mdash;That I have about twenty-four dollars to my name.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;You have the Lake Geneva estate.
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;But I intend to keep it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Can you live?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;I can&rsquo;t imagine not being able to. People make money in books and
      I&rsquo;ve found that I can always do the things that people do in books. Really
      they are the only things I can do.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Be definite.
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;I don&rsquo;t know what I&rsquo;ll do&mdash;nor have I much curiosity.
      To-morrow I&rsquo;m going to leave New York for good. It&rsquo;s a bad town unless
      you&rsquo;re on top of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Do you want a lot of money?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;No. I am merely afraid of being poor.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Very afraid?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;Just passively afraid.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Where are you drifting?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;Don&rsquo;t ask <i>me!</i>
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Don&rsquo;t you care?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;Rather. I don&rsquo;t want to commit moral suicide.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Have you no interests left?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;None. I&rsquo;ve no more virtue to lose. Just as a cooling pot gives
      off heat, so all through youth and adolescence we give off calories of
      virtue. That&rsquo;s what&rsquo;s called ingenuousness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;An interesting idea.
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;That&rsquo;s why a &ldquo;good man going wrong&rdquo; attracts people. They stand
      around and literally <i>warm themselves</i> at the calories of virtue he
      gives off. Sarah makes an unsophisticated remark and the faces simper in
      delight&mdash;&ldquo;How <i>innocent</i> the poor child is!&rdquo; They&rsquo;re warming
      themselves at her virtue. But Sarah sees the simper and never makes that
      remark again. Only she feels a little colder after that.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;All your calories gone?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;All of them. I&rsquo;m beginning to warm myself at other people&rsquo;s
      virtue.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Are you corrupt?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;I think so. I&rsquo;m not sure. I&rsquo;m not sure about good and evil at all
      any more.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Is that a bad sign in itself?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;Not necessarily.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;What would be the test of corruption?
    </p>
    <p>
      A.&mdash;Becoming really insincere&mdash;calling myself &ldquo;not such a bad
      fellow,&rdquo; thinking I regretted my lost youth when I only envy the delights
      of losing it. Youth is like having a big plate of candy. Sentimentalists
      think they want to be in the pure, simple state they were in before they
      ate the candy. They don&rsquo;t. They just want the fun of eating it all over
      again. The matron doesn&rsquo;t want to repeat her girlhood&mdash;she wants to
      repeat her honeymoon. I don&rsquo;t want to repeat my innocence. I want the
      pleasure of losing it again.
    </p>
    <p>
      Q.&mdash;Where are you drifting?
    </p>
    <p>
      This dialogue merged grotesquely into his mind&rsquo;s most familiar state&mdash;a
      grotesque blending of desires, worries, exterior impressions and physical
      reactions.
    </p>
    <p>
      One Hundred and Twenty-seventh Street&mdash;or One Hundred and
      Thirty-seventh Street.... Two and three look alike&mdash;no, not much.
      Seat damp... are clothes absorbing wetness from seat, or seat absorbing
      dryness from clothes?... Sitting on wet substance gave appendicitis, so
      Froggy Parker&rsquo;s mother said. Well, he&rsquo;d had it&mdash;I&rsquo;ll sue the
      steamboat company, Beatrice said, and my uncle has a quarter interest&mdash;did
      Beatrice go to heaven?... probably not&mdash;He represented Beatrice&rsquo;s
      immortality, also love-affairs of numerous dead men who surely had never
      thought of him... if it wasn&rsquo;t appendicitis, influenza maybe. What? One
      Hundred and Twentieth Street? That must have been One Hundred and Twelfth
      back there. One O Two instead of One Two Seven. Rosalind not like
      Beatrice, Eleanor like Beatrice, only wilder and brainier. Apartments
      along here expensive&mdash;probably hundred and fifty a month&mdash;maybe
      two hundred. Uncle had only paid hundred a month for whole great big house
      in Minneapolis. Question&mdash;were the stairs on the left or right as you
      came in? Anyway, in 12 Univee they were straight back and to the left.
      What a dirty river&mdash;want to go down there and see if it&rsquo;s dirty&mdash;French
      rivers all brown or black, so were Southern rivers. Twenty-four dollars
      meant four hundred and eighty doughnuts. He could live on it three months
      and sleep in the park. Wonder where Jill was&mdash;Jill Bayne, Fayne,
      Sayne&mdash;what the devil&mdash;neck hurts, darned uncomfortable seat. No
      desire to sleep with Jill, what could Alec see in her? Alec had a coarse
      taste in women. Own taste the best; Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, Eleanor,
      were all-American. Eleanor would pitch, probably southpaw. Rosalind was
      outfield, wonderful hitter, Clara first base, maybe. Wonder what Humbird&rsquo;s
      body looked like now. If he himself hadn&rsquo;t been bayonet instructor he&rsquo;d
      have gone up to line three months sooner, probably been killed. Where&rsquo;s
      the darned bell&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      The street numbers of Riverside Drive were obscured by the mist and
      dripping trees from anything but the swiftest scrutiny, but Amory had
      finally caught sight of one&mdash;One Hundred and Twenty-seventh Street.
      He got off and with no distinct destination followed a winding, descending
      sidewalk and came out facing the river, in particular a long pier and a
      partitioned litter of shipyards for miniature craft: small launches,
      canoes, rowboats, and catboats. He turned northward and followed the
      shore, jumped a small wire fence and found himself in a great disorderly
      yard adjoining a dock. The hulls of many boats in various stages of repair
      were around him; he smelled sawdust and paint and the scarcely
      distinguishable fiat odor of the Hudson. A man approached through the
      heavy gloom.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello,&rdquo; said Amory.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Got a pass?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No. Is this private?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is the Hudson River Sporting and Yacht Club.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh! I didn&rsquo;t know. I&rsquo;m just resting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well&mdash;&rdquo; began the man dubiously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll go if you want me to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The man made non-committal noises in his throat and passed on. Amory
      seated himself on an overturned boat and leaned forward thoughtfully until
      his chin rested in his hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Misfortune is liable to make me a damn bad man,&rdquo; he said slowly.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      IN THE DROOPING HOURS
    </p>
    <p>
      While the rain drizzled on Amory looked futilely back at the stream of his
      life, all its glitterings and dirty shallows. To begin with, he was still
      afraid&mdash;not physically afraid any more, but afraid of people and
      prejudice and misery and monotony. Yet, deep in his bitter heart, he
      wondered if he was after all worse than this man or the next. He knew that
      he could sophisticate himself finally into saying that his own weakness
      was just the result of circumstances and environment; that often when he
      raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly:
      &ldquo;No. Genius!&rdquo; That was one manifestation of fear, that voice which
      whispered that he could not be both great and good, that genius was the
      exact combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind,
      that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity. Probably more than any
      concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality&mdash;he
      loathed knowing that to-morrow and the thousand days after he would swell
      pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate
      musician or a first-class actor. He was ashamed of the fact that very
      simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel,
      often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him&mdash;several
      girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil
      influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental
      adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could
      escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the
      infinite possibilities of children&mdash;he leaned and listened and he
      heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny
      whimper to the still night. Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering
      with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his
      mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul. He shivered. What if some day
      the balance was overturned, and he became a thing that frightened children
      and crept into rooms in the dark, approached dim communion with those
      phantoms who whispered shadowy secrets to the mad of that dark continent
      upon the moon....
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Amory smiled a bit.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re too much wrapped up in yourself,&rdquo; he heard some one say. And again&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Get out and do some real work&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stop worrying&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He fancied a possible future comment of his own.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;I was perhaps an egotist in youth, but I soon found it made me
      morbid to think too much about myself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil&mdash;not
      to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously
      out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico,
      half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers
      closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy
      undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned,
      carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange
      litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and
      from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself
      and rather addicted to Oriental scents)&mdash;delivered from success and
      hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all,
      only to the artificial lake of death.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were so many places where one might deteriorate pleasantly: Port
      Said, Shanghai, parts of Turkestan, Constantinople, the South Seas&mdash;all
      lands of sad, haunting music and many odors, where lust could be a mode
      and expression of life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would
      seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      STILL WEEDING
    </p>
    <p>
      Once he had been miraculously able to scent evil as a horse detects a
      broken bridge at night, but the man with the queer feet in Phoebe&rsquo;s room
      had diminished to the aura over Jill. His instinct perceived the fetidness
      of poverty, but no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and
      sensuality.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were no more wise men; there were no more heroes; Burne Holiday was
      sunk from sight as though he had never lived; Monsignor was dead. Amory
      had grown up to a thousand books, a thousand lies; he had listened eagerly
      to people who pretended to know, who knew nothing. The mystical reveries
      of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night,
      now vaguely repelled him. The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from
      mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking
      the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom. The pageantry of his
      disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians,
      Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets,
      Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before
      him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored
      lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the
      tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had
      gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all
      on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in
      his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most
      convenient food.
    </p>
    <p>
      Women&mdash;of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to
      transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously
      incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of
      experience&mdash;had become merely consecrations to their own posterity.
      Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, Eleanor, were all removed by their very beauty,
      around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing
      anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory based his loss of faith in help from others on several sweeping
      syllogisms. Granted that his generation, however bruised and decimated
      from this Victorian war, were the heirs of progress. Waving aside petty
      differences of conclusions which, although they might occasionally cause
      the deaths of several millions of young men, might be explained away&mdash;supposing
      that after all Bernard Shaw and Bernhardi, Bonar Law and Bethmann-Hollweg
      were mutual heirs of progress if only in agreeing against the ducking of
      witches&mdash;waiving the antitheses and approaching individually these
      men who seemed to be the leaders, he was repelled by the discrepancies and
      contradictions in the men themselves.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was, for example, Thornton Hancock, respected by half the
      intellectual world as an authority on life, a man who had verified and
      believed the code he lived by, an educator of educators, an adviser to
      Presidents&mdash;yet Amory knew that this man had, in his heart, leaned on
      the priest of another religion.
    </p>
    <p>
      And Monsignor, upon whom a cardinal rested, had moments of strange and
      horrible insecurity&mdash;inexplicable in a religion that explained even
      disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the
      devil that made you doubt him. Amory had seen Monsignor go to the houses
      of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in
      routine, to escape from that horror.
    </p>
    <p>
      And this priest, a little wiser, somewhat purer, had been, Amory knew, not
      essentially older than he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory was alone&mdash;he had escaped from a small enclosure into a great
      labyrinth. He was where Goethe was when he began &ldquo;Faust&rdquo;; he was where
      Conrad was when he wrote &ldquo;Almayer&rsquo;s Folly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who
      through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the
      labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half
      unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for
      themselves only what could be accepted for all men&mdash;incurable
      romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth
      as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering
      personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower,
      yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of
      speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a
      positive value to life....
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory stopped. He began for the first time in his life to have a strong
      distrust of all generalities and epigrams. They were too easy, too
      dangerous to the public mind. Yet all thought usually reached the public
      after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had
      popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugar-coated Nietzsche and Ibsen
      and Schopenhauer. The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead
      genius through some one else&rsquo;s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams.
    </p>
    <p>
      Life was a damned muddle... a football game with every one off-side and
      the referee gotten rid of&mdash;every one claiming the referee would have
      been on his side....
    </p>
    <p>
      Progress was a labyrinth... people plunging blindly in and then rushing
      wildly back, shouting that they had found it... the invisible king&mdash;the
      elan vital&mdash;the principle of evolution... writing a book, starting a
      war, founding a school....
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory, even had he not been a selfish man, would have started all
      inquiries with himself. He was his own best example&mdash;sitting in the
      rain, a human creature of sex and pride, foiled by chance and his own
      temperament of the balm of love and children, preserved to help in
      building up the living consciousness of the race.
    </p>
    <p>
      In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of
      the labyrinth.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Another dawn flung itself across the river, a belated taxi hurried along
      the street, its lamps still shining like burning eyes in a face white from
      a night&rsquo;s carouse. A melancholy siren sounded far down the river.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      MONSIGNOR
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory kept thinking how Monsignor would have enjoyed his own funeral. It
      was magnificently Catholic and liturgical. Bishop O&rsquo;Neill sang solemn high
      mass and the cardinal gave the final absolutions. Thornton Hancock, Mrs.
      Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a
      host of friends and priests were there&mdash;yet the inexorable shears had
      cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands.
      To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with
      closed hands upon his purple vestments. His face had not changed, and, as
      he never knew he was dying, it showed no pain or fear. It was Amory&rsquo;s dear
      old friend, his and the others&rsquo;&mdash;for the church was full of people
      with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken.
    </p>
    <p>
      The cardinal, like an archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy
      water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the Requiem
      Eternam.
    </p>
    <p>
      All these people grieved because they had to some extent depended upon
      Monsignor. Their grief was more than sentiment for the &ldquo;crack in his voice
      or a certain break in his walk,&rdquo; as Wells put it. These people had leaned
      on Monsignor&rsquo;s faith, his way of finding cheer, of making religion a thing
      of lights and shadows, making all light and shadow merely aspects of God.
      People felt safe when he was near.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of Amory&rsquo;s attempted sacrifice had been born merely the full realization
      of his disillusion, but of Monsignor&rsquo;s funeral was born the romantic elf
      who was to enter the labyrinth with him. He found something that he
      wanted, had always wanted and always would want&mdash;not to be admired,
      as he had feared; not to be loved, as he had made himself believe; but to
      be necessary to people, to be indispensable; he remembered the sense of
      security he had found in Burne.
    </p>
    <p>
      Life opened up in one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly
      and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly
      in his mind: &ldquo;Very few things matter and nothing matters very much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      On the contrary, Amory felt an immense desire to give people a sense of
      security.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      THE BIG MAN WITH GOGGLES
    </p>
    <p>
      On the day that Amory started on his walk to Princeton the sky was a
      colorless vault, cool, high and barren of the threat of rain. It was a
      gray day, that least fleshly of all weathers; a day of dreams and far
      hopes and clear visions. It was a day easily associated with those
      abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in
      mocking laughter by the light of the moon. The trees and clouds were
      carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized
      to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn.
    </p>
    <p>
      The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much
      annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or
      else run him down. So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was
      scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon&mdash;cordiality manifested
      within fifty miles of Manhattan&mdash;when a passing car slowed down
      beside him and a voice hailed him. He looked up and saw a magnificent
      Locomobile in which sat two middle-aged men, one of them small and anxious
      looking, apparently an artificial growth on the other who was large and
      begoggled and imposing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you want a lift?&rdquo; asked the apparently artificial growth, glancing
      from the corner of his eye at the imposing man as if for some habitual,
      silent corroboration.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You bet I do. Thanks.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The chauffeur swung open the door, and, climbing in, Amory settled himself
      in the middle of the back seat. He took in his companions curiously. The
      chief characteristic of the big man seemed to be a great confidence in
      himself set off against a tremendous boredom with everything around him.
      That part of his face which protruded under the goggles was what is
      generally termed &ldquo;strong&rdquo;; rolls of not undignified fat had collected near
      his chin; somewhere above was a wide thin mouth and the rough model for a
      Roman nose, and, below, his shoulders collapsed without a struggle into
      the powerful bulk of his chest and belly. He was excellently and quietly
      dressed. Amory noticed that he was inclined to stare straight at the back
      of the chauffeur&rsquo;s head as if speculating steadily but hopelessly some
      baffling hirsute problem.
    </p>
    <p>
      The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the
      personality of the other. He was of that lower secretarial type who at
      forty have engraved upon their business cards: &ldquo;Assistant to the
      President,&rdquo; and without a sigh consecrate the rest of their lives to
      second-hand mannerisms.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Going far?&rdquo; asked the smaller man in a pleasant disinterested way.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite a stretch.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hiking for exercise?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; responded Amory succinctly, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m walking because I can&rsquo;t afford to
      ride.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then again:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Are you looking for work? Because there&rsquo;s lots of work,&rdquo; he continued
      rather testily. &ldquo;All this talk of lack of work. The West is especially
      short of labor.&rdquo; He expressed the West with a sweeping, lateral gesture.
      Amory nodded politely.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you a trade?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No&mdash;Amory had no trade.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Clerk, eh?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      No&mdash;Amory was not a clerk.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Whatever your line is,&rdquo; said the little man, seeming to agree wisely with
      something Amory had said, &ldquo;now is the time of opportunity and business
      openings.&rdquo; He glanced again toward the big man, as a lawyer grilling a
      witness glances involuntarily at the jury.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory decided that he must say something and for the life of him could
      think of only one thing to say.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I want a great lot of money&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The little man laughed mirthlessly but conscientiously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s what every one wants nowadays, but they don&rsquo;t want to work for
      it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A very natural, healthy desire. Almost all normal people want to be rich
      without great effort&mdash;except the financiers in problem plays, who
      want to &lsquo;crash their way through.&rsquo; Don&rsquo;t you want easy money?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course not,&rdquo; said the secretary indignantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But,&rdquo; continued Amory disregarding him, &ldquo;being very poor at present I am
      contemplating socialism as possibly my forte.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Both men glanced at him curiously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;These bomb throwers&mdash;&rdquo; The little man ceased as words lurched
      ponderously from the big man&rsquo;s chest.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If I thought you were a bomb thrower I&rsquo;d run you over to the Newark jail.
      That&rsquo;s what I think of Socialists.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory laughed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What are you,&rdquo; asked the big man, &ldquo;one of these parlor Bolsheviks, one of
      these idealists? I must say I fail to see the difference. The idealists
      loaf around and write the stuff that stirs up the poor immigrants.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said Amory, &ldquo;if being an idealist is both safe and lucrative, I
      might try it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s your difficulty? Lost your job?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not exactly, but&mdash;well, call it that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What was it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Writing copy for an advertising agency.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lots of money in advertising.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory smiled discreetly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I&rsquo;ll admit there&rsquo;s money in it eventually. Talent doesn&rsquo;t starve any
      more. Even art gets enough to eat these days. Artists draw your magazine
      covers, write your advertisements, hash out rag-time for your theatres. By
      the great commercializing of printing you&rsquo;ve found a harmless, polite
      occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche. But
      beware the artist who&rsquo;s an intellectual also. The artist who doesn&rsquo;t fit&mdash;the
      Rousseau, the Tolstoi, the Samuel Butler, the Amory Blaine&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who&rsquo;s he?&rdquo; demanded the little man suspiciously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said Amory, &ldquo;he&rsquo;s a&mdash;he&rsquo;s an intellectual personage not very
      well known at present.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The little man laughed his conscientious laugh, and stopped rather
      suddenly as Amory&rsquo;s burning eyes turned on him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What are you laughing at?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;These <i>intellectual</i> people&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you know what it means?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The little man&rsquo;s eyes twitched nervously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, it <i>usually</i> means&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It <i>always</i> means brainy and well-educated,&rdquo; interrupted Amory. &ldquo;It
      means having an active knowledge of the race&rsquo;s experience.&rdquo; Amory decided
      to be very rude. He turned to the big man. &ldquo;The young man,&rdquo; he indicated
      the secretary with his thumb, and said young man as one says bell-boy,
      with no implication of youth, &ldquo;has the usual muddled connotation of all
      popular words.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You object to the fact that capital controls printing?&rdquo; said the big man,
      fixing him with his goggles.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;and I object to doing their mental work for them. It seemed to
      me that the root of all the business I saw around me consisted in
      overworking and underpaying a bunch of dubs who submitted to it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here now,&rdquo; said the big man, &ldquo;you&rsquo;ll have to admit that the laboring man
      is certainly highly paid&mdash;five and six hour days&mdash;it&rsquo;s
      ridiculous. You can&rsquo;t buy an honest day&rsquo;s work from a man in the
      trades-unions.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve brought it on yourselves,&rdquo; insisted Amory. &ldquo;You people never make
      concessions until they&rsquo;re wrung out of you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What people?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your class; the class I belonged to until recently; those who by
      inheritance or industry or brains or dishonesty have become the moneyed
      class.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you imagine that if that road-mender over there had the money he&rsquo;d be
      any more willing to give it up?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, but what&rsquo;s that got to do with it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The older man considered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I&rsquo;ll admit it hasn&rsquo;t. It rather sounds as if it had though.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In fact,&rdquo; continued Amory, &ldquo;he&rsquo;d be worse. The lower classes are
      narrower, less pleasant and personally more selfish&mdash;certainly more
      stupid. But all that has nothing to do with the question.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just exactly what is the question?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Here Amory had to pause to consider exactly what the question was.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      AMORY COINS A PHRASE
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When life gets hold of a brainy man of fair education,&rdquo; began Amory
      slowly, &ldquo;that is, when he marries he becomes, nine times out of ten, a
      conservative as far as existing social conditions are concerned. He may be
      unselfish, kind-hearted, even just in his own way, but his first job is to
      provide and to hold fast. His wife shoos him on, from ten thousand a year
      to twenty thousand a year, on and on, in an enclosed treadmill that hasn&rsquo;t
      any windows. He&rsquo;s done! Life&rsquo;s got him! He&rsquo;s no help! He&rsquo;s a spiritually
      married man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory paused and decided that it wasn&rsquo;t such a bad phrase.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Some men,&rdquo; he continued, &ldquo;escape the grip. Maybe their wives have no
      social ambitions; maybe they&rsquo;ve hit a sentence or two in a &lsquo;dangerous
      book&rsquo; that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and
      were knocked off. Anyway, they&rsquo;re the congressmen you can&rsquo;t bribe, the
      Presidents who aren&rsquo;t politicians, the writers, speakers, scientists,
      statesmen who aren&rsquo;t just popular grab-bags for a half-dozen women and
      children.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;s the natural radical?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Amory. &ldquo;He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old
      Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried
      man hasn&rsquo;t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as
      a by-product of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the
      popular magazine, the influential weekly&mdash;so that Mrs. Newspaper,
      Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil
      people across the street or those cement people &lsquo;round the corner.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It makes wealthy men the keepers of the world&rsquo;s intellectual conscience
      and, of course, a man who has money under one set of social institutions
      quite naturally can&rsquo;t risk his family&rsquo;s happiness by letting the clamor
      for another appear in his newspaper.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But it appears,&rdquo; said the big man.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where?&mdash;in the discredited mediums. Rotten cheap-papered weeklies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right&mdash;go on.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, my first point is that through a mixture of conditions of which the
      family is the first, there are these two sorts of brains. One sort takes
      human nature as it finds it, uses its timidity, its weakness, and its
      strength for its own ends. Opposed is the man who, being spiritually
      unmarried, continually seeks for new systems that will control or
      counteract human nature. His problem is harder. It is not life that&rsquo;s
      complicated, it&rsquo;s the struggle to guide and control life. That is his
      struggle. He is a part of progress&mdash;the spiritually married man is
      not.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The big man produced three big cigars, and proffered them on his huge
      palm. The little man took one, Amory shook his head and reached for a
      cigarette.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Go on talking,&rdquo; said the big man. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve been wanting to hear one of you
      fellows.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      GOING FASTER
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Modern life,&rdquo; began Amory again, &ldquo;changes no longer century by century,
      but year by year, ten times faster than it ever has before&mdash;populations
      doubling, civilizations unified more closely with other civilizations,
      economic interdependence, racial questions, and&mdash;we&rsquo;re <i>dawdling</i>
      along. My idea is that we&rsquo;ve got to go very much faster.&rdquo; He slightly
      emphasized the last words and the chauffeur unconsciously increased the
      speed of the car. Amory and the big man laughed; the little man laughed,
      too, after a pause.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Every child,&rdquo; said Amory, &ldquo;should have an equal start. If his father can
      endow him with a good physique and his mother with some common sense in
      his early education, that should be his heritage. If the father can&rsquo;t give
      him a good physique, if the mother has spent in chasing men the years in
      which she should have been preparing herself to educate her children, so
      much the worse for the child. He shouldn&rsquo;t be artificially bolstered up
      with money, sent to these horrible tutoring schools, dragged through
      college... Every boy ought to have an equal start.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right,&rdquo; said the big man, his goggles indicating neither approval nor
      objection.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Next I&rsquo;d have a fair trial of government ownership of all industries.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s been proven a failure.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No&mdash;it merely failed. If we had government ownership we&rsquo;d have the
      best analytical business minds in the government working for something
      besides themselves. We&rsquo;d have Mackays instead of Burlesons; we&rsquo;d have
      Morgans in the Treasury Department; we&rsquo;d have Hills running interstate
      commerce. We&rsquo;d have the best lawyers in the Senate.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They wouldn&rsquo;t give their best efforts for nothing. McAdoo&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Amory, shaking his head. &ldquo;Money isn&rsquo;t the only stimulus that
      brings out the best that&rsquo;s in a man, even in America.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You said a while ago that it was.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is, right now. But if it were made illegal to have more than a certain
      amount the best men would all flock for the one other reward which
      attracts humanity&mdash;honor.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The big man made a sound that was very like <i>boo</i>.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s the silliest thing you&rsquo;ve said yet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, it isn&rsquo;t silly. It&rsquo;s quite plausible. If you&rsquo;d gone to college you&rsquo;d
      have been struck by the fact that the men there would work twice as hard
      for any one of a hundred petty honors as those other men did who were
      earning their way through.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Kids&mdash;child&rsquo;s play!&rdquo; scoffed his antagonist.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not by a darned sight&mdash;unless we&rsquo;re all children. Did you ever see a
      grown man when he&rsquo;s trying for a secret society&mdash;or a rising family
      whose name is up at some club? They&rsquo;ll jump when they hear the sound of
      the word. The idea that to make a man work you&rsquo;ve got to hold gold in
      front of his eyes is a growth, not an axiom. We&rsquo;ve done that for so long
      that we&rsquo;ve forgotten there&rsquo;s any other way. We&rsquo;ve made a world where
      that&rsquo;s necessary. Let me tell you&rdquo;&mdash;Amory became emphatic&mdash;&ldquo;if
      there were ten men insured against either wealth or starvation, and
      offered a green ribbon for five hours&rsquo; work a day and a blue ribbon for
      ten hours&rsquo; work a day, nine out of ten of them would be trying for the
      blue ribbon. That competitive instinct only wants a badge. If the size of
      their house is the badge they&rsquo;ll sweat their heads off for that. If it&rsquo;s
      only a blue ribbon, I damn near believe they&rsquo;ll work just as hard. They
      have in other ages.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t agree with you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know it,&rdquo; said Amory nodding sadly. &ldquo;It doesn&rsquo;t matter any more though.
      I think these people are going to come and take what they want pretty
      soon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A fierce hiss came from the little man.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;<i>Machine-guns!</i>&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, but you&rsquo;ve taught them their use.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The big man shook his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In this country there are enough property owners not to permit that sort
      of thing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory wished he knew the statistics of property owners and non-property
      owners; he decided to change the subject.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the big man was aroused.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When you talk of &lsquo;taking things away,&rsquo; you&rsquo;re on dangerous ground.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How can they get it without taking it? For years people have been stalled
      off with promises. Socialism may not be progress, but the threat of the
      red flag is certainly the inspiring force of all reform. You&rsquo;ve got to be
      sensational to get attention.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Russia is your example of a beneficent violence, I suppose?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Quite possibly,&rdquo; admitted Amory. &ldquo;Of course, it&rsquo;s overflowing just as the
      French Revolution did, but I&rsquo;ve no doubt that it&rsquo;s really a great
      experiment and well worth while.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you believe in moderation?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You won&rsquo;t listen to the moderates, and it&rsquo;s almost too late. The truth is
      that the public has done one of those startling and amazing things that
      they do about once in a hundred years. They&rsquo;ve seized an idea.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That however the brains and abilities of men may differ, their stomachs
      are essentially the same.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      THE LITTLE MAN GETS HIS
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you took all the money in the world,&rdquo; said the little man with much
      profundity, &ldquo;and divided it up in equ&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, shut up!&rdquo; said Amory briskly and, paying no attention to the little
      man&rsquo;s enraged stare, he went on with his argument.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The human stomach&mdash;&rdquo; he began; but the big man interrupted rather
      impatiently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m letting you talk, you know,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;but please avoid stomachs.
      I&rsquo;ve been feeling mine all day. Anyway, I don&rsquo;t agree with one-half you&rsquo;ve
      said. Government ownership is the basis of your whole argument, and it&rsquo;s
      invariably a beehive of corruption. Men won&rsquo;t work for blue ribbons,
      that&rsquo;s all rot.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if
      resolved this time to have his say out.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There are certain things which are human nature,&rdquo; he asserted with an
      owl-like look, &ldquo;which always have been and always will be, which can&rsquo;t be
      changed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory looked from the small man to the big man helplessly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Listen to that! <i>That&rsquo;s</i> what makes me discouraged with progress. <i>Listen</i>
      to that! I can name offhand over one hundred natural phenomena that have
      been changed by the will of man&mdash;a hundred instincts in man that have
      been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization. What this man
      here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the
      associated mutton-heads of the world. It negates the efforts of every
      scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that
      ever gave his life to humanity&rsquo;s service. It&rsquo;s a flat impeachment of all
      that&rsquo;s worth while in human nature. Every person over twenty-five years
      old who makes that statement in cold blood ought to be deprived of the
      franchise.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The little man leaned back against the seat, his face purple with rage.
      Amory continued, addressing his remarks to the big man.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;These quarter-educated, stale-minded men such as your friend here, who <i>think</i>
      they think, every question that comes up, you&rsquo;ll find his type in the
      usual ghastly muddle. One minute it&rsquo;s &lsquo;the brutality and inhumanity of
      these Prussians&rsquo;&mdash;the next it&rsquo;s &lsquo;we ought to exterminate the whole
      German people.&rsquo; They always believe that &lsquo;things are in a bad way now,&rsquo; 
      but they &lsquo;haven&rsquo;t any faith in these idealists.&rsquo; One minute they call
      Wilson &lsquo;just a dreamer, not practical&rsquo;&mdash;a year later they rail at him
      for making his dreams realities. They haven&rsquo;t clear logical ideas on one
      single subject except a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change. They
      don&rsquo;t think uneducated people should be highly paid, but they won&rsquo;t see
      that if they don&rsquo;t pay the uneducated people their children are going to
      be uneducated too, and we&rsquo;re going round and round in a circle. That&mdash;is
      the great middle class!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The big man with a broad grin on his face leaned over and smiled at the
      little man.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re catching it pretty heavy, Garvin; how do you feel?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The little man made an attempt to smile and act as if the whole matter
      were so ridiculous as to be beneath notice. But Amory was not through.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The theory that people are fit to govern themselves rests on this man. If
      he can be educated to think clearly, concisely, and logically, freed of
      his habit of taking refuge in platitudes and prejudices and
      sentimentalisms, then I&rsquo;m a militant Socialist. If he can&rsquo;t, then I don&rsquo;t
      think it matters much what happens to man or his systems, now or
      hereafter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am both interested and amused,&rdquo; said the big man. &ldquo;You are very young.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Which may only mean that I have neither been corrupted nor made timid by
      contemporary experience. I possess the most valuable experience, the
      experience of the race, for in spite of going to college I&rsquo;ve managed to
      pick up a good education.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You talk glibly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not all rubbish,&rdquo; cried Amory passionately. &ldquo;This is the first time
      in my life I&rsquo;ve argued Socialism. It&rsquo;s the only panacea I know. I&rsquo;m
      restless. My whole generation is restless. I&rsquo;m sick of a system where the
      richest man gets the most beautiful girl if he wants her, where the artist
      without an income has to sell his talents to a button manufacturer. Even
      if I had no talents I&rsquo;d not be content to work ten years, condemned either
      to celibacy or a furtive indulgence, to give some man&rsquo;s son an
      automobile.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, if you&rsquo;re not sure&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That doesn&rsquo;t matter,&rdquo; exclaimed Amory. &ldquo;My position couldn&rsquo;t be worse. A
      social revolution might land me on top. Of course I&rsquo;m selfish. It seems to
      me I&rsquo;ve been a fish out of water in too many outworn systems. I was
      probably one of the two dozen men in my class at college who got a decent
      education; still they&rsquo;d let any well-tutored flathead play football and <i>I</i>
      was ineligible, because some silly old men thought we should <i>all</i>
      profit by conic sections. I loathed the army. I loathed business. I&rsquo;m in
      love with change and I&rsquo;ve killed my conscience&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So you&rsquo;ll go along crying that we must go faster.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That, at least, is true,&rdquo; Amory insisted. &ldquo;Reform won&rsquo;t catch up to the
      needs of civilization unless it&rsquo;s made to. A laissez-faire policy is like
      spoiling a child by saying he&rsquo;ll turn out all right in the end. He will&mdash;if
      he&rsquo;s made to.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you don&rsquo;t believe all this Socialist patter you talk.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. Until I talked to you I hadn&rsquo;t thought seriously about it.
      I wasn&rsquo;t sure of half of what I said.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You puzzle me,&rdquo; said the big man, &ldquo;but you&rsquo;re all alike. They say Bernard
      Shaw, in spite of his doctrines, is the most exacting of all dramatists
      about his royalties. To the last farthing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said Amory, &ldquo;I simply state that I&rsquo;m a product of a versatile mind
      in a restless generation&mdash;with every reason to throw my mind and pen
      in with the radicals. Even if, deep in my heart, I thought we were all
      blind atoms in a world as limited as a stroke of a pendulum, I and my sort
      would struggle against tradition; try, at least, to displace old cants
      with new ones. I&rsquo;ve thought I was right about life at various times, but
      faith is difficult. One thing I know. If living isn&rsquo;t a seeking for the
      grail it may be a damned amusing game.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      For a minute neither spoke and then the big man asked:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What was your university?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Princeton.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The big man became suddenly interested; the expression of his goggles
      altered slightly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I sent my son to Princeton.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps you knew him. His name was Jesse Ferrenby. He was killed last
      year in France.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I knew him very well. In fact, he was one of my particular friends.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He was&mdash;a&mdash;quite a fine boy. We were very close.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory began to perceive a resemblance between the father and the dead son
      and he told himself that there had been all along a sense of familiarity.
      Jesse Ferrenby, the man who in college had borne off the crown that he had
      aspired to. It was all so far away. What little boys they had been,
      working for blue ribbons&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      The car slowed up at the entrance to a great estate, ringed around by a
      huge hedge and a tall iron fence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Won&rsquo;t you come in for lunch?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Amory shook his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Thank you, Mr. Ferrenby, but I&rsquo;ve got to get on.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The big man held out his hand. Amory saw that the fact that he had known
      Jesse more than outweighed any disfavor he had created by his opinions.
      What ghosts were people with which to work! Even the little man insisted
      on shaking hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-by!&rdquo; shouted Mr. Ferrenby, as the car turned the corner and started
      up the drive. &ldquo;Good luck to you and bad luck to your theories.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Same to you, sir,&rdquo; cried Amory, smiling and waving his hand.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      &ldquo;OUT OF THE FIRE, OUT OF THE LITTLE ROOM&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Eight hours from Princeton Amory sat down by the Jersey roadside and
      looked at the frost-bitten country. Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon
      composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared
      moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was
      always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons
      was more likable. Frost and the promise of winter thrilled him now, made
      him think of a wild battle between St. Regis and Groton, ages ago, seven
      years ago&mdash;and of an autumn day in France twelve months before when
      he had lain in tall grass, his platoon flattened down close around him,
      waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner. He saw the two pictures
      together with somewhat the same primitive exaltation&mdash;two games he
      had played, differing in quality of acerbity, linked in a way that
      differed them from Rosalind or the subject of labyrinths which were, after
      all, the business of life.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am selfish,&rdquo; he thought.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is not a quality that will change when I &lsquo;see human suffering&rsquo; or
      &lsquo;lose my parents&rsquo; or &lsquo;help others.&rsquo; 
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This selfishness is not only part of me. It is the most living part.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is by somehow transcending rather than by avoiding that selfishness
      that I can bring poise and balance into my life.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is no virtue of unselfishness that I cannot use. I can make
      sacrifices, be charitable, give to a friend, endure for a friend, lay down
      my life for a friend&mdash;all because these things may be the best
      possible expression of myself; yet I have not one drop of the milk of
      human kindness.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The problem of evil had solidified for Amory into the problem of sex. He
      was beginning to identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke
      and the early Wells. Inseparably linked with evil was beauty&mdash;beauty,
      still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor&rsquo;s voice, in an old song at
      night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half
      rhythm, half darkness. Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it
      longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil. Beauty
      of great art, beauty of all joy, most of all the beauty of women.
    </p>
    <p>
      After all, it had too many associations with license and indulgence. Weak
      things were often beautiful, weak things were never good. And in this new
      loneness of his that had been selected for what greatness he might
      achieve, beauty must be relative or, itself a harmony, it would make only
      a discord.
    </p>
    <p>
      In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after
      his disillusion had been made complete. He felt that he was leaving behind
      him his chance of being a certain type of artist. It seemed so much more
      important to be a certain sort of man.
    </p>
    <p>
      His mind turned a corner suddenly and he found himself thinking of the
      Catholic Church. The idea was strong in him that there was a certain
      intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and
      religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome. Quite conceivably it was an
      empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary
      bulwark against the decay of morals. Until the great mobs could be
      educated into a moral sense some one must cry: &ldquo;Thou shalt not!&rdquo; Yet any
      acceptance was, for the present, impossible. He wanted time and the
      absence of ulterior pressure. He wanted to keep the tree without
      ornaments, realize fully the direction and momentum of this new start.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      The afternoon waned from the purging good of three o&rsquo;clock to the golden
      beauty of four. Afterward he walked through the dull ache of a setting sun
      when even the clouds seemed bleeding and at twilight he came to a
      graveyard. There was a dusky, dreamy smell of flowers and the ghost of a
      new moon in the sky and shadows everywhere. On an impulse he considered
      trying to open the door of a rusty iron vault built into the side of a
      hill; a vault washed clean and covered with late-blooming, weepy
      watery-blue flowers that might have grown from dead eyes, sticky to the
      touch with a sickening odor.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory wanted to feel &ldquo;William Dayfield, 1864.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He wondered that graves ever made people consider life in vain. Somehow he
      could find nothing hopeless in having lived. All the broken columns and
      clasped hands and doves and angels meant romances. He fancied that in a
      hundred years he would like having young people speculate as to whether
      his eyes were brown or blue, and he hoped quite passionately that his
      grave would have about it an air of many, many years ago. It seemed
      strange that out of a row of Union soldiers two or three made him think of
      dead loves and dead lovers, when they were exactly like the rest, even to
      the yellowish moss.
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      Long after midnight the towers and spires of Princeton were visible, with
      here and there a late-burning light&mdash;and suddenly out of the clear
      darkness the sound of bells. As an endless dream it went on; the spirit of
      the past brooding over a new generation, the chosen youth from the
      muddled, unchastened world, still fed romantically on the mistakes and
      half-forgotten dreams of dead statesmen and poets. Here was a new
      generation, shouting the old cries, learning the old creeds, through a
      revery of long days and nights; destined finally to go out into that dirty
      gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more
      than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up
      to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken....
    </p>
    <p>
      Amory, sorry for them, was still not sorry for himself&mdash;art,
      politics, religion, whatever his medium should be, he knew he was safe
      now, free from all hysteria&mdash;he could accept what was acceptable,
      roam, grow, rebel, sleep deep through many nights....
    </p>
    <p>
      There was no God in his heart, he knew; his ideas were still in riot;
      there was ever the pain of memory; the regret for his lost youth&mdash;yet
      the waters of disillusion had left a deposit on his soul, responsibility
      and a love of life, the faint stirring of old ambitions and unrealized
      dreams. But&mdash;oh, Rosalind! Rosalind!...
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s all a poor substitute at best,&rdquo; he said sadly.
    </p>
    <p>
      And he could not tell why the struggle was worth while, why he had
      determined to use to the utmost himself and his heritage from the
      personalities he had passed....
    </p>
    <p>
      He stretched out his arms to the crystalline, radiant sky.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know myself,&rdquo; he cried, &ldquo;but that is all.&rdquo;
     </p>
